I notice that people setting out to write histories do not always take up that work for one single reason, but for many and varied reasons.
Some apply themselves to this branch of learning in order to show off their writing skill and so gain fame for their erudition; others seek to gratify people who were involved in the events and try to achieve this, even when the project surpasses their abilities.
Still others are driven by a sense of duty, for having taken part in the events they feel they must record them.
For some, finally, it is greatness of the events that makes them wish to bring them from obscurity into the light, for the benefit of the public.
Of all these reasons for writing history, I am affected by the last two.
For since I was myself involved in that war which we Jews fought against the Romans and have first hand knowledge of its details and its conclusion, I needed to write about it since others in their writings have distorted the truth about it.
I undertake the present work in the belief that all who know Greek will find it worthy of their attention.
It will explain our past history and the constitution of our government, as interpreted from the Hebrew Scriptures. It was my intention to explain in my earlier book, about the War, who the Jews originally were, the fortunes that came to them, the laws by which they were taught piety and the practice of other virtues, and also the wars they fought in ages past, before being unwillingly dragged into this recent war with the Romans. But as that would have made that work too long, I set it aside to form a separate work, with its own proper beginning and ending.
And yet some who wanted to know this history urged me to go on with it, and I yielded mainly to the persuasion of Epaphroditus, who loves learning of all kinds, but especially the knowledge of history, since he himself was involved in important events and in various turns of fortune, and has shown admirable firmness of character and a steadfast resolve through them all.
He is always motivating people of ability towards whatever is useful and beneficial, to join their efforts to his own. So I was ashamed to let any laziness of disposition get the better of me, instead of devoting myself to what is worthwhile, and went on more cheerfully with my work. Besides these motives, I had others to think about: whether our ancestors wanted to share our knowledge, and whether any of the Greeks were eager to learn the story of our nation.
I discovered that the second of the Ptolemy kings was deeply interested in learning and a collector of books. He was particularly eager to have our law and how we are ruled translated into Greek.
Our high priest Eleazar, who was second to none in virtue, did not refuse that king this favour, which he certainly would have done except for our ancestral custom of hiding nothing that is good.
So I thought that I should imitate our high priest's generosity and assume that today there are still many lovers of learning like the king.
Yet even he did not receive not all of our writings, since those who were sent to Alexandria as interpreters gave him only the books of the Law.
Countless matters are reported in our sacred books, for they contain the history of five thousand years and include many strange events, many hazards of war and great deeds of leaders, as well as changes in how we were ruled.
Speaking generally, whoever reads this history can learn above all that things turn out well, even beyond expectation, for those who follow God's will and do not dare to break his excellent laws, and that the reward of happiness is promised by God
but when people turn aside in any way from their strict observance, what before was possible becomes impossible and any project they set about turns into an absolute disaster.
So now I urge all who read these books to apply their minds to God and to consider whether our Legislator has properly understood His nature and attributed to Him only such acts as become His power, and kept his words about Him unstained by those indecent myths current among others, even though, dealing with matters of so long ago, he might have allowed himself the use of such fictions.
For he was born two thousand years ago, even farther back in time than the poets dare to set as the birth of their gods, much less the actions or the laws of human beings.
I will proceed, therefore, to describe in detail and in order what is contained in our records.
For that is the procedure I have promised to follow throughout this work, without adding or omitting anything.
But as almost everything in it depends on the wisdom of Moses our Legislator, I must first briefly say something about him, or otherwise those who read my book may wonder how it is that my discourse about laws and historical events, enters so much into philosophy.
The reader must realise that Moses deemed it vital that one who would live his own life well and give laws to others, must in the first place consider the divine nature, and contemplate God's actions so as to imitate the best of all patterns, so far as is possible for human nature, and try to persevere in it.
Without such contemplation the Legislator himself could not be in the right frame mind, nor would what he wrote go to promote virtue in his readers. I mean, they must be taught first of all that God is the Father and Lord of all things, who sees all things, and that He grants a happy life to those who follow Him, but plunges into inevitable misery those who do not walk in the paths of virtue.
When Moses wished to teach his countrymen this lesson, he did not begin establishing his laws in the same way that other legislators do, based on contracts and rights between one man and another, but by raising their minds towards God and his creation of the world, and by persuading them that we humans are God's most excellent creatures upon earth. Once they obeyed God, they were easily persuaded in all things.
Other legislators promoted fables and in their words attributed the most shameful of human vices to the gods and provided bad men with the most plausible excuses for their crimes,
while our Legislator, having once shown God as perfect in virtue, believed that men should strive to share in this, and severely reproached those who did not so hold and believe.
I beg my readers then, to examine this whole undertaking from that viewpoint. Then they will see that there is nothing in it against either the majesty of God, or his love towards mankind, for all things here have a reference to the nature of the universe. Our Legislator speaks wisely, but sometimes enigmatically and in devtional allegory, but he speaks plainly and explicitly when necessary.
However, those who desire to know the reasons of everything, may find here a very curious philosophical theory, which I refrain from explaining here and now, but if God gives me time I will write it when I have finished the present work. I shall set myself to the history before me, after first mentioning what Moses says about the creation of the world, as I find it described in the sacred books. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
While this lay invisible in thick darkness, with a wind moving across its surface, God commaned that there should be light. When this was made, he looked on the entire mass and separated light from darkness, and named them Night and Day, giving the name Evening to the time of rest and Morning to the dawning of light.
This was to be the first day, for Moses called it "day one."
I could give the reason for this now, but as I have promised to give the causes for everything in a separate treatise, I shall postpone its explanation until then.
After that, on the second day, he placed the heaven above the whole world, deciding that it should stand apart, and placing a firmament around it he arranged it in harmony with the earth, to supply moisture and rain and dews according to need.
On the third day he made dry land appear, and around it the sea.
That same day he made the plants and the seeds spring up from the earth.
On the fourth day he adorned the heaven with the sun, the moon and the other stars and set them in their motions and orbits, to mark the changes of the seasons.
On the fifth day he made living creatures, both those that swim and those that fly, in the sea and in the air. He arranged their intercourse and coupling for procreation, so that their kind might increase and multiply. On the sixth day he created four-footed beasts, making them male and female and on the same day he formed humankind. So Moses says that in just six days the world and all that is in it was made, and that the seventh day he rested and took repose from labour. That is why we celebrate a rest from our labours on that day and call it the Sabbath, a word which in Hebrew means Rest.
Then after the seventh day, Moses begins to treat of nature, telling about the formation of man, how God took dust from the ground and formed man and placed within him spirit and soul. This man was called Adam, which in the Hebrew tongue means Red, as he was formed from red earth, for virgin and true earth is of that colour.
Then God presented to Adam the living creatures, male and female, which he had made according to their kinds, and he gave them the names by which they are still called.
When He saw how Adam had no female for companionship, for there was none, and noticed how the other animals had this, He put him to sleep and took one of his ribs and from it formed a woman.
When she was brought to him Adam recognised her as made from himself. In the Hebrew tongue a woman is called Issha, but the name of this woman was Eva, which means the mother of all living.
He says that God planted a paradise in the east, with abundant plants of all sorts, and that among them was the plant of life and another of knowledge, for distinguishing good and evil.
When He brought Adam and his wife into this garden, He told them to care for the plants.
The garden was watered by one river, which ran round the whole earth and was divided into four sections
Phison, which denotes a large number, flows into India and into the sea and is called Ganges by the Greeks.
The Euphrates and the Tigris flow into the Red Sea.
The name Euphrates, or Phoras, means either a dispersion or a flower, whereas Tigris, or Diglath, means what runs swiftly in a narrow channel.
Geon which runs through Egypt means what rises on the other side from us, and the Greeks call it the Nile. God told Adam and his wife to eat of all the rest of the plants, but to abstain from the tree of knowledge, and warned them that if they touched it, it would become their ruin. While all living creatures at that time spoke the same language, the snake that lived alongside Adam and his wife envied them the happiness they would have if they were obedient to God's commands.
Thinking that if they were to disobey they would fall into misfortune, he maliciously persuaded the woman to taste of the tree of knowledge, saying that in it lay the discernment of good and evil, and if they took possession of it they would lead a happy life no less than the Divinity.
In this way he misled the woman to despise the command of God, and once she had tasted of the plant and liked it, she persuaded Adam to share it too.
Then they found that they were naked to each other, and feeling ashamed to be so in public thought of some covering. The plant had sharpened their minds, so that they covered themselves with fig-leaves, and tying these in front for modesty's sake, they felt somewhat better, finding it what they previously lacked. When God came into the garden, Adam, who previously used to accompany Him, kept out of His way, conscious of his crime. God found this strange and asked the reason for it, and why he who previously enjoyed His company, now shunned and avoided it. Knowing that he had disobeyed God's command, he said nothing, but God said, "I had planned for you to lead a happy life, with no hardship or care or worry of soul, with all things needed for your enjoyment and pleasure growing of their own accord by my providence, without your labour and toil, since a life of labour and toil would soon bring on old age, and death would not be far away.
But now that you have spurned my will and disobeyed my commands, your silence does not spring from virtue but from a guilty conscience."
Adam sought to excuse his sin and begged God not to be angry with him. He blamed his wife for the affair, saying that she had misled him into committing the offence, while she accused the snake.
But God imposed a penalty on him for submitting to female advice, saying that the earth would no longer produce of its own accord, but would yield some of its fruits only under stress from their toil, and others it would not give at all. He subjected Eve to childbearing and the pains of birth because she misled Adam just as the snake had persuaded her, and so caused disaster.
He deprived the snake of speech, angry at his malice towards Adam, putting poison under his tongue and making him an enemy to humans, which is why they aimed blows at his head, the place of his malice towards men, as the easiest way to take revenge on him. By depriving the snake of the use of his feet, He made him to crawl and wriggle along the ground.
Having set these penalties for them, God exiled Adam and Eve from the garden to another place.
They had two male children of whom the elder was called Cain, which means "aquiring," and the younger was called Abel, which means "nothing," and they also had daughters.
Now the two brothers chose different lifestyles. Abel, the younger, devoted himself to righteousness, and believing that God was present in all that he did, attended to virtue and lived the life of a shepherd. But Cain was very evil and in particular cared about profit, and it was he who first thought of ploughing the ground. He killed his brother for the following reason.
They decided to sacrifice to God and Cain brought the fruits of the earth and of his farming, but Abel brought milk and the first-fruits of his flocks.
God favoured this offering, preferring to be honoured by what grew naturally on its own than by what a covetous man had forced from the ground. Cain was furious that God preferred Abel over him, so he killed his brother and hid his corpse, thinking to be undetected. But God knew if it, so he came to Cain and asked what had become of his brother, since for many days he had not seen him and he used to see them together in company.
Cain was at a loss and did not know what to say to God. First he declared that he knew nothing about his brother's disappearance, but then, angered by God's insistent questioning, he replied that he was not his brother's tutor or guardian, and had not noticed what he was doing. But God condemned Cain for his brother's murder, saying: "I am surprised that you do not know what has become of a man whom you killed yourself." Yet God did not punish him with death, because he offered sacrifice and implored him not to be severely angry, yet he made him accursed and warned his descendants to the seventh generation, and expelled him and his wife from that land.
As he was afraid that in his wanderings he might fall victim to wild beasts and be killed, He bade him not to be depressed for such reason, but to travel all over the earth without fearing any harm from wild beasts.
Then he set a recognisable mark upon him and told him to leave.
After many travels Cain and his wife built a city called Nais, and settled and had children there. He did not accept his punishment in a good spirit but rather grew more wicked, for all he wanted was what served his bodily pleasure, even if this drove him to encroach upon his neighbours.
Through robbery and violence he increased the wealth of his household, and urged those he met to win pleasure and loot by robbery, instructing them in it, whereas up to then people had lived simply, in community. He was the author of measures and weights, which changed the former innocent way of life towards cunning and craftiness.
He was also the first to fence lands in, and built a city and fortified it with walls and forced his family to come and live in it, and called that city Anocha, after his eldest son Anoch.
Anoch had a son named Jarad, whose son was Malaliel, whose son was Mathousalas, whose son was Lamech, who had seventy seven children by two wives, Sella and Ada.
Of those children by Ada, one was Jobel, who built tents and loved the pasturing of sheep. Youbal, who was born of the same mother as him, devoted himself to music, and invented harps and lutes, while one of his children by the other wife, Tubal, surpassed everyone in strength and was famous for warlike activities, through which he won all he needed for his bodily pleasure; and he was first to invent the forging of brass.
Lamech had a daughter called Naamah, and because he was so skilled in divine matters that he knew he would pay a special penalty for Cain's murder of his brother, he told it to his wives.
Already in Adam's lifetime, Cain's descendants became very wicked, each of them turning out worse than his predecessor.
They were fierce in war and plunged into robbing, and any of them who was hesitant to murder was still bold in insolence and greed.
We must say something more about Adam, who was the first man and made from the earth. After Abel was killed and Cain fled due to his murder, Adam longed for children and had a great desire to beget them, though he was two hundred and thirty years old, to which he added another seven hundred years before he died.
He did indeed have many other children, including Seth.
It would take long to name the others, so I will only try to give an account of the descendants of Seth.
When he was reared to the age of discretion he became a virtuous man, and with his excellent character he left behind him children who followed his footsteps.
All of them were of good character and they lived happily all their lives in the same land, without strife or severe incidents, and were the founders of of the science of the ordered beauty of the heavenly bodies.
So that their discoveries might not be lost to humanity before being properly known, as Adam had predicted that the world would at some stage be destroyed by the fire and again by a flood of water, they made two pillars, one of brick and the other of stone, on which they inscribed their discoveries,
so that if the pillar of brick were ever ruined by a flood, the pillar of stone would remain to teach mankind what was inscribed on it, and that they had built another pillar of brick.
This remains in the land of Seiris to this day.
For seven generations these people continued to follow God as the Lord of the universe and to follow the guidance of virtue, but in the course of time they were perverted and abandoned the customs of their fathers, not paying due honour to God or caring about justice to others. Their former zeal for virtue was now replaced in double measure with evil, as though they were at war with God. Many angels of God now went in to women and had sons who proved arrogant and, trusting in their own strength, despised all that was good. Our tradition says that these men acted audaciously, like those whom the Greeks call giants.
Noah, indignant at their conduct and displeased at their scheming, urged them to mend their outlook and actions for the better. But seeing them so enslaved to their wickedness and pleasure that they would not yield to him and afraid that they would kill him with his wife and children and their spouses, he emigrated from the land.
God loved this man for his righteousness, but not only did he condemn the wickedness of the others, he decided to destroy all of mankind and make another race pure from evil, and shortening their lives and reducing the number of their years to one hundred and twenty, he turned the dry land into sea. So all the others were killed and Noah alone was saved, for God put into his mind this plan as a means of survival. He made a four storey-high ark, three hundred feet long, fifty feet broad and thirty feet high, and entering that ark with his wife and sons and their wives, he brought into it provisions to support their needs, and all sorts of living creatures, male and female, to preserve their kinds, some of them numbered in sevens.
The sides and roof of the ark were so strong that it could not be sunk or swamped by the violence of the water, and by it Noah and his family were saved.
He was the tenth in the line of Adam, being the son of Lamech, whose father was Mathuselah, son of Anoch, son of Jared, son of Malaleel, who, along with many of his sisters, were the children of Cain, son of Anos who was the son of Seth, son of Adam.
This sorrow came on them in the six hundredth year of Noah's rule, in the second month, called Dius by the Macedonians, and Marsuan by the Hebrews, for that is how they arranged their calendar in Egypt.
Moses appointed Nisan, or Xanthicus, as the first month for their festivals, because in that month he brought them out of Egypt. He counted this month as starting the year regarding divine worship, though he kept the original sequence for selling and buying and other ordinary affairs. He says that this flood began on the twenty seventh day of that month.
This was two thousand six hundred and fifty six years from Adam, the first man, for the time is written down in our sacred books, since those who lived then noted most carefully both the births and deaths of prominent men. Seth was born when Adam was in his two hundred and thirtieth year, and he lived nine hundred and thirty years. Seth begot Anos in his two hundred and fifth year, and after living for nine hundred and twelve years, he passed on the leadership to Caina his son, whom he begot in his hundred and ninetieth year.
His span of life was nine hundred and twelve years.
Caina who lived nine hundred and ten years, had a son, Malaleel, in his hundred and seventieth year.
This Malaleel lived eight hundred and ninety five years and died, leaving his son Jared, whom he begot when he was in his hundred and sixty fifth year.
He lived for nine hundred and sixty nine years and his son Anoch succeeded him, born when his father was a hundred and sixty two.
He, after living for three hundred and sixty five years, left to go to God, which is why there is no written account of his death.
Mathuselah was born to Anoch when he was a hundred and sixty five years old, and at the age of a hundred and eighty seven he had Lamech, to whom he handed over the leadership, having held it for nine hundred and sixty nine years. When Lamech had ruled for seven hundred and seventy seven years, he put his son Noah in charge of affairs, who was born when Lamech was aged a hundred and eighty eight years; and he ruled affairs for nine hundred and fifty years. All together, these add up to the above-named sum of years.
One should not focus on these men's date of death, for their lifetimes reached into those of their children and grandchildren, but rather pay attention to their dates of birth.
When God gave the sign and it began to rain, it poured for all of forty days, until the water rose fifteen feet above the earth.
This was why so few survived, as they had nowhere to take refuge.
When the rain ceased, the water only began to abate after a hundred and fifty days, on the seventeenth day of the seventh month, when it gradually began to subside.
The ark came to rest on top of a mountain in Armenia and on noting this, Noah opened it up, saw a small piece of land around it and remained calm, with his hopes revived.
Some days later, when the water had receded still more, he sent out a raven, to learn if any other part of the earth were left dry by the water and whether he might safely leave the ark.
But the raven, finding all the land still flooded, returned to Noah. After seven days he sent out a dove, to learn the state of the ground.
It returned to him covered in mud and bringing an olive branch, by which he knew that the earth was now cleared of the cataclysm. After another seven days he sent the living creatures out of the ark, and emerged with his family and sacrificed to God and feasted with his household. The Armenians call this place the Landing Place for the ark landed safely there, and its remains are shown there by the inhabitants to this day.
All the barbarian history writers mention this flood and this ark; among whom is Berosus the Chaldean. For when describing the circumstances of the flood, he goes on: "It is said there is still some part of this ship in Armenia, at the mountain of the Cordyaeans, and that some people carry off pieces of the asphalt, to use as amulets for averting harm."
It is also mentioned by Hieronymus the Egyptian, who wrote the Phoenician Antiquities and Mnaseas, and by many others. Nicholas of Damascus, in his ninety-sixth book, tells of it in this way:
"Above Minyas in Armenia there is a large mountain called Baris, where many are said to have found safety at the time of the Deluge, and that one man landed on its summit, carried in an ark, the remnants of whose timber were preserved for a long time. He may be the one of whom Moses the Jewish Legislator wrote." Noah was afraid that since God had sentenced mankind to destruction, the earth might be flooded every year, so he offered burned-sacrifice and begged God to let nature later follow its former orderly course and never again inflict such a penalty as would endanger all living things; and having punished the wicked, to spare those who for their merits had been spared from the disaster.
If they were not fully saved, these would be worse off than the others and suffer a worse condemnation, if they were spared only to suffer another deluge. After bearing the terrible sight of the first deluge, must they also be ruined by a second?
So he begged Him to accept his sacrifice, that the earth may never again suffer similar effects of his anger, but to let people go on cultivating it, building cities and living happily in them, not lacking any of those good things that they enjoyed before the Flood, and reach a good, ripe old age, like the people of old.
As Noah made these petitions, God loved him for his righteousness, and granted all his prayers, saying that it was not He who had brought destruction on the world, but those who had suffered this just vengeance.
He would not have brought men into the world had he meant to destroy them, since it would show greater wisdom not to have given them life at all than to destroy them, after it was given. "But their outrages to my sanctity and goodness," he said, "forced me to inflict this punishment on them.
However in future I will not so angrily punish their misdeeds, especially due to your prayers. If at any time I send unusually bad weather, do not fear the size of the downpours, for the water shall never again swamp the earth. You are to refrain from shedding human blood and from murder and punish those who do any such thing. I allow you to use all other animals to satisfy your needs and appetites, for I have made you masters of all that walk on the land and swim in the waters and fly in the air, except for their blood, for in it is the life.
And by my bow (meaning the rainbow, which they call the bow of God) I will give you a sign that I have set aside my anger. When God had said and promised this, he went away.
When Noah had lived three hundred and fifty years after the Flood and all that time happily, he died, having lived for nine hundred and fifty years.
But let no one, comparing the lives of the ancients with our own and the brevity of its years, think that what is said of them is false; or make the shortness of our present lives an argument, that could not reach so long a lifespan either.
For they were beloved by God and had come from God himself, and as their diet then was more conducive to longevity, they could well live so long. Besides, God gave them longer life on account of their virtue and their useful astronomical and geometrical discoveries, for they could not have foretold anything with security unless they lived in least six hundred years, or the full cyclic year.
All who have written about ancient times, whether Greeks or barbarians, confirm the truth of this.
For Manetho, who wrote the history of Egypt and Berosus who did so for the Chaldeans and Mochus and Hestieus, and, besides these, Hieronymus the Egyptian and those who wrote the history of the Phoenicians, agree to what I say here. Hesiod too and Hecataeus, Hellanicus and Acusilaus, as well as Ephorus and Nicholas tell how the ancients lived a thousand years.
But let each one judge these things as he thinks fit.
Noah had three sons, Shem, Japhet and Ham, born a hundred years before the Deluge. First, these men descended from the mountains into the plains and lived there, and persuaded others who because of the flood were much afraid of the lower ground and reluctant to come down from the heights, to dare to follow their example.
The plain where they first lived was called Senaar. God told them to send out colonies to fully populate of the earth, and not to quarrel among themselves, but to cultivate much of the earth and enjoy its plentiful fruits. But in their foolishness they disobeyed God, and therefore fell into disasters which made them experience the error of their ways.
For when they were flourishing with a large young population God again advised them to send out colonies, but they did not obey, imagining their prosperity was due not to God's favour but their own innate strength.
Along with disobeying the divine will, they suspected that He had ordered them to go out in colonies merely so that they would be easier to overcome, being isolated from each other.
It was Nabrod who provoked them to such an insult and contempt of God. He was the grandson of Ham, son of Noah, a bold man of great strength, who persuaded them to attribute their prosperity not to God, but to their own courage.
He gradually brought matters under a tyranny, seeing that the only way to turn people from the fear of God was to keep them dependent on his own power, and that to defend them, in case God should ever again want to drown the world, he threatened to build a tower too high for the waters to reach, and so avenge the ruin of their ancestors.
The populace readily followed Nabrod's view and reckoned it a slavery to submit to God, so they built a tower, sparing no effort and not delaying in the work.
With so many working on it, it rose up more quickly than anyone would have expected.
It was so stout and strongly built that it appeared less than its great height, and was built of baked bricks, cemented with asphalt so as to be watertight.
When God saw them acting in this mad way, he did not decide to utterly destroy them, since even the destruction of the previous sinners had not taught them wisdom, but he put them in turmoil by making them speak different tongues, so that they could not understand each other. The place where they built the tower is called Babylon nowadays, after the confusion of that original language once understood by all, for in Hebrew Babel means confusion.
The Sibyl also mentions this tower and the confusion of human language, when she says, "When all people were of one language, some of them built a high tower as if by it they could climb up to heaven; but the gods sent windstorms and destroyed the tower and gave each one his own language, and for this reason the city was called Babylon."
Hestiaeus mentions the plan of Senaar in the district of Babylonia, as follows: "The priests who survived took the sacred vessels of Zeus Enyalius and came to Senaar of Babylonia."
They were scattered then, due to their variety of languages, and formed colonies everywhere and each colony took possession of the land they found and to which God led them, so that they filled the whole earth, both the inland and the coastland, and some crossed the sea in ships and inhabited the islands.
Some of those nations retain the names their founders gave them, but some were changed so as to be more intelligible to the inhabitants. It was the Greeks who did this, for when they grew powerful in later ages, they claimed the glory of the past and gave to the nations names they could understand, and imposed their form of culture on them, as if they had founded them.
Noah's children had sons in whose honour the nations were named by their first occupants. Noah's son Japhet had seven sons, who occupied first the mountains of Taurus and Amanus and proceeded through Asia as far as the river Tanais and across Europe as far as Gadeira, settling the lands they encountered where none had lived before, and calling the nations by their own names.
Gomer founded those whom the Greeks now call Galatians, but were then called Gomerites and Magog founded the Magogites after himself, whom they call Scythians.
The sons of Japhet, Javan and Mados, were also founders of nations: from Mados came the Madaeans, whom the Greeks call Medes, and from Javan are descended Ionia and all the Greeks. Theobel founded the Theobelites, who are now called Iberes.
The Mescheni were founded by Meschos and are now called Cappadocians, though a trace of their ancient name is still visible, for there is still among them a city called Mazaca, an indication to those who understand such things that this was once the name of the whole nation. Thiras called his subjects Thirasians, but the Greeks changed the name into Thracians.
These were the countries occupied by the children of Japhet.
Of the three sons of Javan, son of Japhet, Halisa named the Haliseans whom he ruled, who are now the Aeolians; and Tharsus named the Tharsians, the former name of Cilicia, in sign of which their noblest city and metropolis Tarsus, the tau having replaced the theta.
Cethimus occuped the island of Cethima, now called Cyprus, from which all islands and most of the sea-coasts are called by the Hebrews Cethim, a sign of which is that one city in Cyprus has kept that name. It is called Citius by those who use the Greek language, not far removed from the name Cethim. These were the nations occupied by the children and grandchildren of Japhet.
After noting something that the Greeks probably do not know, I will return to explain what I have omitted. To please my readers the names are here rendered in the Greek style, as our native language does not pronounce them like that, for we retain the form and termination of names and for us, Noah is Nochas, and his name retains this form in all cases. The children of Ham held the land from Syria and Amanus and the mountains of Libanus; taking all its sea-coast as far as the ocean and making it their own. Some of its names have vanished utterly while others have changed in pronunciation, and so are hard to identify, though a few have kept their names intact.
Of the four sons of Ham, time has no way changed the name of Chus, for his Ethiopian descendants are even to this day called Chusites, both by themselves and by everyone in Asia.
The memory of the Mesraites is preserved in their name, for all of us living here call Egypt Merse and the Egyptians Merseans. Phut was the founder of Libya and called the inhabitants Phutites, after himself.
There is even a river in the land of the Moors bearing that name, which is why one sees most of the Greek historiographers mentioning that river and the adjoining area under the name of Phut, which was changed and is now called after Libyos, one of the sons of Mesraim. We will soon report what caused it to be also called Africa.
Canaan, the fourth son of Ham, lived in the country now called Judea and called it by his own name Canaan. The children of these were: Sabas, who founded the Sabeans, Evilas, who founded the Evileans, now called Getuli, and Sabathes the Sabathens, whom the Greeks call Astaborans.
Sabactas founded the Sabactenians, Ragmus the Ragmeans, and he had two sons, one of whom, Judadas, settled the Judadeans, a nation of the western Ethiopians and left them his name; as did Sabas to the Sabeans. But Nabrod, son of Chus, stayed and was tyrant in Babylon, as already said. The eight children of Mesraim possessed the country from Gaza to Egypt, though it kept the name of only one, Philistinos, and the Greeks name his country Palestine.
The others were Lumaeus and Anamia and Labimos, who settled alone in Libya and called the country after himself. Of Nedim and Pethrosim and Chesloim and Cephthomos we know nothing except their names, for the Ethiopian war which we shall later describe destroyed those cities.
The sons of Canaan were: Sidonius, who built a city of the same name, called by the Greeks Sidon; Amathus who lived in Amathine, which the locals even now call Amathe, though from one of his descendants the Macedonians gave it the name Epiphania. Arudaeus took the island of Aradus and Arucaeus took Arce in Libanus.
Of the seven others, Euaeus, Chetteus, Jebuseus, Amorreus, Gergesus, Eudeus, Sineus and Samareus, we have nothing from the sacred books except their names, for the Hebrews destroyed their cities, a fate that befell them for the reason I shall explain.
When the earth was restored to its former condition after the deluge, Noah set to planting it with vines, and when he gathered the grapes in due season and the wine was ready for use, he offered sacrifice and held a feast. When he was drunk he fell asleep and lay there indecently naked; and as his youngest son saw him he laughingly pointed it out to his brothers, who covered up their father.
When Noah learned what had happened, he prayed that his other sons might prosper though he did not curse Ham because he was his son, but he cursed his offspring
and while the rest of them escaped God's curse, it fell on the children of Canaan.
About this we shall say more later. Shem, the third son of Noah, had five sons, who occupied the land from the Euphrates to the Indian Ocean.
For Elam left behind him the Elamites, the forebears of the Persians.
Ashur lived in the city of Ninon, and named his subjects Assyrians, who prospered greatly.
Arphaxad named his subjects the Arphaxadites, now called the Chaldeans. Aramaeus ruled the Aramites, whom the Greeks call Syrians, and Loudas founded the Loudites, now called Lydians. Of the four sons of Aramos, Ouses founded Trachonitis and Damascus which is between Palestine and Coele-Syria, Ouros founded Armenia, and Getheres the Bactrians, and Mesa the Mesaneans in the area that is now called Charax Spasini. Arphaxad's son was Sala, whose son was Heber, from whom the Jews were originally called Hebrews. Heber begot Joetan and Phaleg, who got the name Phaleg because he was born at the dispersion of the territories, as for the Hebrews phalek means division.
Of the children of Heber, Joctan's sons were Elmodad, Saleph, Azermoth, Eira, Edoram, Ouzal, Dakles, Ebal, Abimael, Safas, Ophir, Euiles and Jobel. These inhabited part of India from the river Cophen and part of Asia adjoining it. Such is my report about the sons of Shem.
I will go on to tell about the Hebrews. Reus was the son of Heber's son Phaleg, and his son was Serug, to whom was born Nahor, whose son was Therros, the father of Abraham, who was the tenth generation from Noah, born in the two hundred and ninety second year after the deluge.
Therros begot Abram in his seventieth year; Nahor begot Therros when he was a hundred and twenty; Serug was a hundred and thirty two when Nahor was born to him; Rumos had Serug at one hundred and thirty, and Phaleg was the same age when he had Rumos.
Heber begot Phaleg in his hundred and thirty-fourth year, having himself being born of the hundred and thirty year-old Selos, whom Arphaxad begot at the age of a hundred and thirty five.
Arphaxad was the son of Shem and born twelve years after the deluge.
Now Abram had two brothers, Nahor and Aran, of whom Aran left behind a son, Lot, and daughters, Sara and Melcha, and he died among the Chaldeans, in a Chaldean city named Ur, and his tomb is shown to this day. The brothers married their nieces, Nabor taking Melcha and Abram taking Sara.
Now as Therros hated Chaldea, in his grief for the loss of Aran, they all moved to Haran in Mesopotamia, where Therros died and was buried, after living to be two hundred and five years old, for the human lifespan was already diminishing and becoming shorter up to the birth of Moses, after whom the limit of human life was fixed by God at a hundred and twenty years, the length that Moses lived.
By Melcha Nahor had eight sons: Uz and Buz, Kemuel, Chesed, Azau, Pheldas, Jadelph and Bethuel. These were all the legitimate sons of Nahor, for Teba and Gaam and Tachas and Maaca were born of his concubine Reuma; and Bethuel had a daughter, Rebecca, and a son, Laban.
Abram, having no son of his own, adopted Lot, his brother Aran's son and his wife Sara's brother, and left the land of Chaldea when he was seventy-five years old and at God's command went into Canaan, where he lived and then left it to his descendants. He had a remarkable grasp of all things and great powers of persuasion and was not mistaken in his views.
Thus he began to have higher ideas of virtue than others and decided to renew and change the opinion all people then had about God.
He was the first who dared to proclaim that there was only one God, the Creator of the universe, and that if any others contributed to human prosperity, each gave it only at his command and not by their own power.
This he concluded from the movements of both land and sea, and those of the sun and moon and all the heavens.
If these had power of their own, they would control their own regular motions, but since they do not, it is clear that where they co-operate for our advantage, they do it not of their own power but as subject to Him who orders them, to whom alone we should properly give honour and thanksgiving.
When the Chaldeans and other Mesopotamians challenged him about these doctrines he decided to emigrate, and guided and helped by God, gained possession of the land of Canaan. When he had settled there, he built an altar and offered sacrifice to God.
Berosus mentions our father Abram without naming him, when he says, "In the tenth generation after the Flood, there was among the Chaldeans a just and great man, skilled about the heavens."
Hecataeus gave him more than a mere mention, for he left a book about him. And Nicolaus of Damascus, in the fourth book of his History, says, "Abram reigned though he was a foreigner, for he came with an army from the land above Babylon, called the land of the Chaldeans.
Soon he moved from that country with his people and went into the land then called Canaan, which is now Judea, and his descendants were many; of them we will tell in another work. The name of Abram is still honoured near Damascus, where they point out a village named after him "Abram's Dwelling-Place." When in time a famine took hold in Judea and Abram realised that the Egyptians were prospering, he wanted to go down to them, both to share in their plenty and to hear what their priests had to say about the gods. If they had better notions, he would follow them, but if his ideas were right he would convert them to a better understanding.
He took Sara with him but on account of his wife's great beauty he feared that the king, with an Egyptian's mania for women, would have him killed, so he came up with this plan
he would claim to be her brother and get her to pretend the same, for the sake of them both.
When he came into Egypt, it turned out as Abram had expected. His wife's beauty was highly praised, so that when he heard of her the king of the Egyptians, Pharaothes, would not rest until he saw Sara and was eager for her embrace.
But God thwarted his unjust desires by sending on him an illness and a civic revolt.
When he asked the priests how he could be freed from these troubles, they told him that his misfortune resulted from the wrath of God, for intending to abuse the stranger's wife. Full of fear, he asked Sara who she was and whom she had brought with her, and once he learned the truth he apologised to Abram. Thinking she was his sister and not his wife he had desired her, seeking a family bond with Abram and not drawn by lust to abuse her.
He made him a large gift of money and let him converse with the most learned of the Egyptians, from which his virtue and reputation shone out even more than before.
Since the Egyptians were formerly devoted to different customs and despised each other's rites and were therefore hostile to each other, he conferred with them individually and confuted their principles, proving them to be empty and void of truth. In those conferences he was admired by them as a very wise and prudent man who taught wisely and persuasively on any subject and shared arithmetic with them and passed on to them the science of astronomy. Before Abram's arrival the Egyptians were ignorant of those things, for they came from the Chaldeans into Egypt and from there also to the Greeks.
When returned to Canaan he divided out the land with Lot, because their shepherds were quarrelling over the pasturage, and gave Lot of which area to take. He himself took the base of the mountains, the land the other had left, and lived in Hebron, a city seven years older than Tanis of Egypt. But Lot occupied the land of the plain around the river Jordan, not far from the city of Sodom, at that time a fine city though now destroyed by the will and anger of God, for reasons which I shall show later, in due time.
At that time, while the Assyrians ruled over Asia, the people of Sodom were flourishing, both in riches and in the numbers of their youth. Five kings ruled their territory: Balas, Balaeas, Senabanes and Summobor, with the king of the Baleni, with each ruling his own area.
This is a title
The Assyrians went to war against them, and besieged them, dividing their army into four parts, each part under its own commander. After the battle the victorious Assyrians imposed a tax on the kings of the Sodomites,
who for twelve years submitted to this slavery and continued to pay the tax, but on the thirteenth year rebelled. Then the army of the Assyrians came against them, under their officers Amrapsides, Arioch, Chodorlamor and Thadal.
These had destroyed all Syria and subdued the descendants of the giants, and when they reached the area of Sodom, they camped in the valley called Asphalt Springs, for at that time there were springs there, but now that the city of Sodom has disappeared, the valley has become the lake called Asphaltitis,
and about this lake we shall soon have more to say. When the Sodomites clashed with the Assyrians, it was a very hard-fought battle and many of them were killed and the rest were taken prisoner, among them Lot, who had gone over to the Sodomites as an ally.
When Abram heard of their plight, he feared for his kinsman Lot and felt pity for his Sodomite friends and neighbours.
Planning to come to their help, he marched without delay and on the fifth night attacked the Assyrians near Dan, for so the other source of the Jordan is named, and killed some as they were in their beds, with no inkling of disaster, before they could grasp their armour. Others, who were not yet asleep but were too drunk to fight, fled.
Abram pursued them, until on the next day he corralled them at Hoba in the area of Damascus and, since victory depends not on the size of the group or the number of available hands but on the soldiers' spirit and courage, he overcame their whole force and defeated such a large army with no more than three hundred and eighteen of his servants and three of his friends.
Any of them who fled returned home without glory.
So Abram, when he had saved the Sodomites who had been captured by the Assyrians, including his kinsman Lot, returned home in peace.
The king of Sodom met him at a place they called the Royal Plain.
Melchisedec, king of the city of Salem, also received him there. His name means "righteous king" and such he was, as all agree, and on this account he was made the priest of God, and later Salem was called Jerusalem.
This Melchisedec supplied Abram's army most hospitably and gave them provisions in abundance, and during their feasting he began to praise him and to bless God for subduing his enemies to him.
When Abram gave him the tenth part of his booty, he accepted the gift.
This is a title
Then the king of Sodom asked Abram to keep the remaining booty, wanting only the return of those of his people whom Abram had saved from the Assyrians. But Abram did not accept and wanted no more of the booty than what would feed his servants, though he also provided a portion to his friends who had helped him in the battle. The first of them was called Eschol, and the others Enner and Mambre.
God praised his virtue and said, "You shall not lose the rewards you merited by such good actions." He replied, "And what good are such rewards, when I have none to enjoy them after me?' - for he was still childless. God promised that he would have a son and that would have so many descendants that they would be as numerous as the stars.
When he heard this, he offered a sacrifice to God, as he had commanded him.
The manner of the sacrifice was this
at God's command, he divided a three-year-old heifer and a three-year-old goat and a three-year-old ram, and took a turtle-dove and a pigeon, but the birds he did not divide.
Before he built his altar and while birds of prey were flying there, eager for blood, a divine voice came to him, declaring that for four hundred years his descendants would have harsh neighbours when they were in Egypt, but that after being afflicted they would overcome their enemies and conquer the Canaanites in war and take over their land and cities.
Abram lived near the oak called Ogyges, in a place belonging to Canaan, not far from the city of Hebronites, where, discontent at his wife's barrenness, he begged God to grant him the birth of a male child.
God bade him take heart, saying that on top of all the other benefits he had given to him since leading him from Mesopotamia, he would have children too. So, at God's command, Sara brought to his bed one of her serving girls named Hagar, a woman of Egyptian descent, in order to have children through her.
When this serving girl became pregnant she dared to insult Sara, queening it as though the leadership were to pass to the child to be born of her.
When Abram left it to Sara to punish her, she managed to escape, to avoid the humiliation, and begged God to have pity on her.
Now as she was going through the wilderness an angel of God met her, and told her to return to her masters, for she would later have a better life under self-control, since her woes came from being ungrateful and arrogant to her mistress.
If she disobeyed God and continued on her way, she would die, but if she returned, she would become the mother of a son who would reign over that country. She obeyed these directions and returned to her masters and was forgiven. A little while later, she bore Ismael; which may be rendered Heard by God, because God had heard her prayers. Abram was already eighty-six years old when that son was born to him. When he was ninety-nine, God appeared to him and promised that he would have a son by Sara. He commanded him to name him Isaac, and revealed that from this son would spring great nations and kings and that they would take all of Canaan by war, from Sidon to Egypt. But in order to keep his descendants distinct from others, he instructed that they be circumcised in the flesh of their foreskin, a thing to be done on the eighth day after their birth.
I will explain the reason for this circumcision, in another place.
When Abram also asked about the life of Ismael, God revealed that he would live a long time and become the father of great nations.
Abram then gave thanks to God for these things and he was circumcised immediately with all his family and his son Ismael, who was thirteen years of age and he himself was in his ninety-ninth year.
About this time the Sodomites, arrogant in their numbers and great wealth, grew insolent towards men and impious towards God, no longer recalling the benefits they had received from him, becoming hostile to strangers and avoiding all contact with others.
Angry at this, God decided to punish them for their pride and destroy their city and wither their land, so that neither plant nor fruit would grow from it.
After God's judgment on the Sodomites, Abraham saw three angels, as he sat by the oak of Mambre, at the door of his tent, and thinking them to be strangers, he got up to greet them and asked them to lodge with him as his guests.
When they accepted, he immediately ordered cakes of meal to be made, and killed a calf and roasted it and brought it to them, as they sat under the oak.
They seemed to him to be eating, and then asked about his wife and how Sarah was.
When he said she was inside, they said they would come back again to find she had become a mother. At this the woman laughed inwardly, considering that child-bearing was impossible, as she was ninety years of age and her husband was a hundred. Then they no longer remained concealed, but declared that they were angels of God, one of whom was sent to tell them about the child and the other two to destroy the Sodomites. When Abraham heard this, he was grieved for the people of Sodom, and he got up and implored God for them, not to destroy the good and upright along with the wicked.
When God said that there was no good man among the Sodomites, but that if there were just ten such men among them, he would forgive the sins of them all, Abraham stayed silent. The angels came to the city of the Sodomites and Lot invited them as his guests, for he was a hospitable man who had learned the goodness of Abraham. When the Sodomites saw that the young men who had taken lodgings with Lot were very good-looking, they resolved to force themselves on them, to enjoy their beauty. Lot urged them to show restraint and not to dishonour the guests, but to respect the fact that they lodged with him, but if they could not restrain themselves, he offered his own daughters for their lust, instead of these strangers; but even this did not satisfy them.
Angry at their outrages, God first struck them with blindness so that they could not find entrance to the house, and then condemned all the Sodomites to destruction. Warned by God of the coming ruin of the Sodomites, Lot left the place with his wife and daughters, both of them still virgins, for those who were betrothed to them scorned the thoughts of leaving and treated Lot's words as absurd.
God then hurled a thunderbolt at the city and burned it up, with its inhabitants, and wiped out the countryside with fire, as I said earlier when describing the Jewish War. Lot's wife, who continually turned back to view the city as she left it and too curious about its fate despite God's forbidding it, was changed into a pillar of salt, for I have seen it and it remains to this day.
This is a title
He and his daughters took refuge in a small place sheltered from the fire and settled there. It is still called Zoar, the Hebrew word for a small thing, where, isolated from mankind and short of provisions, he lived in want.
Thinking that the whole human race had perished, the virgins secretly had intercourse with their father. They did this to prevent the extinction of the race, and sons were born to them; to the elder was born Moab, denoting "from his father" and to the younger, Amman, denoting "derived from a kinsman."
The former was ancestor of the Moabites, still today a great nation; the latter was the father of the Ammanites, and both of them inhabit Coele-syria. Such was the manner of Lot's departure from among the Sodomites.
Abraham moved on to Gerar in Palestine, taking Sarah with him disguised as his sister, using the same deceit he had used before, out of fear, for he was afraid that the local king, Abimelech, lusted for Sarah and wanted to seduce her.
This lust was checked by a dangerous illness which came upon him from God, and the doctors had despaired of his life when he fell asleep and saw in a dream, "Do not abuse the stranger's wife!" When he recovered, he told his friends that God had inflicted that illness upon him, to prevent him from wronging the stranger and to preserve the chastity of his wife, since that was not his sister with him, but his lawful wife, and that God had promised to be gracious to him in the future, if this man were reassured about his wife.
After saying this, on his friends' advice he sent for Abraham and told him to have no more fear about any unworthy attempt on his wife, for God was taking care of him and by his providence he would get his wife back unharmed, as God and his wife's conscience would testify
for he would not have desired her from the first, if he had known she was his wife, but since she had been introduced as a sister, he had done him no wrong.
He implored him to be fair and to pray to God for him, promising him all he needed if he wished to remain with him, but if he preferred to leave, he could have an escort and take whatever supplies he had sought when he came to him.
Abraham replied that his relationship to his wife had not been a lie, since she was his brother's daughter, and that in his travels abroad he did not feel safe without such a deception.
To show that he had not caused the king's sickness, but was only anxious for his own safety, he said he was prepared to stay on with him.
So Abimelech assigned him land and money, and they covenanted to be honest with each other and took an oath at a well called Beersheba, which means "The Well of the Oath," as the local people still call it. Not long afterwards, as God had foretold, Abraham had a son by Sarah, whom he called Isaac, which means "Laughter." This was because Sarah laughed when God said that she would bear a son, as she was past the age of child-bearing and could not expect it, being ninety years old and Abraham a hundred.
This son was born a year later, and they circumcised him on the eighth day, and from then on the Jews practice circumcision that many days after a birth, whereas the Arabs circumcise after the thirteenth year, because that was the age when the founder of their race, Ismael, born of Abraham's concubine, was circumcised, as I will later expound in detail.
This is a title
Sarah at first loved Ismael, who was born of her serving girl Hagar, with an affection no less than if he were her own son, for he was being reared to take over the leadership. When she herself had Isaac, she did not want Ismael to be reared along with him, as he was too old for him and could do him harm after their father was dead,
so she persuaded Abraham to send him and his mother away.
At first he did not agree to Sarah's eager request, thinking it cruel to send away a young child and a woman unprovided with the necessities of life.
Later, however, seeing that God approved of Sarah's wishes, he agreed. Entrusting Ismael to his mother, for he was not yet able to walk alone, he told her to take a skinful of water and a loaf of bread and be gone, guided by necessity.
When her provisions failed, she was in a trouble and when the water was almost finished, she laid the young child, who was about to die, under a fir-tree and went on ahead, so as not to be present at his death. But an angel of God met her and told her of a nearby fountain and told her go ahead and rear the child, for she would be very blessed through the survival of Ismael. Encouraged by these promises she then met with some shepherds, by whose help she escaped from her plight.
When the lad reached manhood, she found him a wife, a Egyptian woman as she originally was herself. Of this wife twelve sons were born to Ismael; Nabaioth, Kedar, Abdeel, Mabsam, Idumas, Masmaos, Masaos, Chodad, Theman, Jetur, Naphesus and Cadmas.
These inhabited all the land from the Euphrates to the Red Sea and called it Nabatene.
They are an Arab nation and name their tribes after them, because of their own virtue and of the dignity of their father Abraham. Abraham greatly loved Isaac his only son, given to him by God's favour at the threshold of old age.
The child endeared himself to his parents still more by the practice of every virtue and fulfilling his duty towards them and being zealous in the worship of God.
Abraham trusted in the promise that when he died he would leave his son in a safe and secure situation.
God willed to grant him this, but he wanted first to test Abraham's religious attitude, so He appeared to him and listed all the ways he had blessed him
how he had given him victory over his enemies, and given him his son Isaac, the mainstay of his present prosperity. He said he required this son as a sacrifice and victim and told him to bring him to mount Moriah and there build an altar and offer him upon it as a holocaust, to prove his devotion and that he set God's will above the survival of his own son.
Abraham wished to disobey God in nothing but to serve him completely, for it is by his loving providence that all things have life. So he concealed from his wife and servants God's command and his own intention to slaughter his son, for they would have kept him from obeying God, and he took Isaac and two of his servants, and loading an ass with all that was required for sacrifice, he went off to the mountain.
The two servants accompanied him for two days, but when he saw the mountain on the third day, he left his companions on the plain, and went alone with his son to the mountain, where later king David established the temple.
They had brought with them all that was needed for a sacrifice except the animal to be offered. Isaac was twenty-five years old, and as he was built the altar he asked his father what he intended to offer, since there was no animal there for a victim. He said that God himself would provide a victim, since he can make provide plentifully for people in need, and deprive others of what they already have, if they confide in it too much; and if He graciously chose to be present at this sacrifice, he would provide a victim too.
When the altar was prepared and Abraham had laid on the wood and all was ready, he said to his son, "My child, I prayed so long to have you as my son. Then when you came into my life there was nothing I would not do for your upbringing, which I cherished, and nothing made me happier than to see you grow up, so that at my death I could leave you to rule after me.
But just as it was by God's will that I became your father, so it is now his will that I give you up, so bear this dedication generously.
It is to God my support and protector that I surrender you, who now sees fit to ask this homage in return for his favours to me.
Just as you were born, so you will now die, not in the normal way but as sent ahead in sacrifice by your own father to God, the Father of all. I reckon he judges you worthy not to leave this life by disease, war, or any of the other cruel ways by which death usually comes.
He will receive your soul with prayers and religious rites and put you close to himself, where you will be the help and support me in my old age. It was for this that I brought you up, and now you leave God to me, to console me instead of you."
As the son of such a father, Isaac's character was so generous that he accepted this explanation gladly. He said he would be unworthy of his birth if he rejected the will of God and of his father and not did readily resign himself up to both, for it would be wrong to disobey, even if his father alone had decided it. So he went immediately to the altar to be sacrificed, and it would have happened if God had not prevented it.
He loudly called Abraham's name and forbade him to kill his son, since it was not a desire for human blood that had moved him to order him to kill his son, nor had he made him a father only to remove the boy so terribly, but he just wished to test his spirit, to see if he would obey such a command.
Now that he was sure of his loyalty and his deep devotion, he was glad to have given him so much, and promised to show all care for him and his race, and that his son would live to a great age and after a happy life would pass on the noble leadership to his good and legitimate offspring.
He foretold too that his family would grow into many nations and that the patriarchs would leave behind them an everlasting name, and gain possession of the land of Canaan and be envied by all people.
After saying this, God sent them a ram they had not noticed before, as the sacrifice. So Abraham and Isaac embraced, having received each other back beyond all expectation and with the promises of such great blessings. After the sacrifice they returned to Sarah and lived happily together, and God helped them in everything they asked.
This is a title
Sarah died a short time later, having lived one hundred and twenty-seven years, and they buried her in Hebron, where the Canaanites publicly allowed them a burying-place. Abraham bought this piece of ground for four hundred shekels from Ephron, an inhabitant of Hebron. Here too Abraham and his descendants built tombs for themselves.
Abraham later married Keturah, by whom he had six sons, men of courage and intelligence: Zambran and Jazar and Madan and Madian and Josabak and Sous. The sons of Sous were Sabathan and Dadan. The sons of Dadan were Latusim and Assur and Luom. The sons of Madan were Ephas and Eophren and Anoch and Ebidas and Eldas.
This is a title
Abraham managed to send all these sons and grandsons out to colonise, and they took possession of Troglodytis and of Arabia Felix, extending to the Red Sea.
It is said that this Eophren made war on Libya and took it and that his grandchildren, when they inhabited it, called it Africa after him.
Alexander Polyhistor is my witness here, when he says, "Cleodemus the prophet, surnamed Malchus, who wrote a history of the Jews, just as did their Legislator, Moses, says that many sons were born to Abraham by Keturah.
He gives their names and lists three of them, Jafra, Surim and Japheros. From Surim the land of Assyria was named, and from the other two, Jafra and Japheros, the land of Africa was named, for these men soldiered with Hercules against Libya and Antaeus, and that Hercules married Jafra's daughter and of her he begot a son, Diodorus, and that Sophon was his son, from whom the barbarous Sophacians were named."
When Abraham, the father of Isaac, intended to take Rebecca, his brother Nahor's grand-daughter, as wife for his son Isaac, who was then about forty years old, he sent the oldest of his servants to arrange her betrothal, after binding him with firm pledges.
They pledged as follows, each put his hand under the other's thigh and called on God to witness what they would do. He also sent to the people living there gifts such as they had rarely if ever seen before.
It took this man some time to get there, as travel is difficult in Meopotamia, in winter because of the deep mud and in summer for lack of water, and also because of the bandits who can be avoided only by prudent travellers; but he reached Haran, and on the outskirts of the town met a large number of maidens going to get water.
He prayed to God that he would find Rebecca among them, whom Abraham had sent him to espouse for his son, if she would agreed to the marriage, and to make her known to him through this sign that while others denied him a drink, she would give it him.
With this intention he went to the well and asked the maidens to fetch him a drink. But while the others refused, claiming that they needed all of it at home and could spare none for him, only one of the whole group rebuked their rudeness towards the stranger, saying: "What will you ever share with anybody, if you won't even give them water?" and kindly offered it to him.
He began to hope for the success of his mission, but wishing to find out, praised her generosity and good nature for not fearing to give to those in need what had cost her some effort to draw. He asked who her parents were, wishing them joy from having such a child. "And may you be espoused," he said, "to their satisfaction, into the house of a good husband and bear him legitimate children."
She did not reject his inquiries, but told him about her family. "My name is Rebecca; my father was Bethuel, but he is dead, and Laban is my brother, and along with my mother takes care of all our affairs and is the guardian of my virginity."
When the servant heard this, he was very glad at what had been done and said, seeing how clearly God had directed his journey. Producing his bracelets and other ornaments which it was thought decent for virgins to wear, he gave them to the girl, in thanks for her kindness in letting him drink, saying that it was right for her to have them since she had been kinder than the other girls.
She asked him to come and lodge with them, since the onset of night would not let him travel any farther, so producing the splendid women's garments he had brought, he said there was no one he could more securely entrust it to than the sort of person she had proven to be. From her he felt he could guess at the kindness of her mother and brother, who would not turn him away, for he did not wish to burden anybody but would pay for his lodging with his own money.
She replied that he was right about the kindness of her parents, but blamed him for thinking them so mean as to accept his money. He would have everything free of charge but she must first inform her brother Laban, and then bring him with his permission. When this was done, she introduced the stranger, and his camels were taken and tended to by Laban's servants, and he was brought in to him to supper. After supper, he said to him and the girl's mother, "Abraham is the son of Terah and a kinsman of yours, for Nahor, the grandfather of these children, was the brother of Abraham, both on his father's and mother's side. This man has sent me to you, wanting to take the girl as a wife for his legitimate son, who was reared as his only heir.
Though he could have for him had the most prosperous of all the women in that region, he did not want his son to marry any of them, but wants this match out of honour to his clan.
He is a man whose ardour and inclination you should not despise.
All that happened on my journey was by the will of God and that I came upon your daughter and your house.
For when I was near the city, I saw many maidens coming to the well and to meet with this girl, as it turned out.
So you should ratify the match which God has already pointed out, and show your respect for Abraham, who sent me here so urgently, by giving your consent to this girl." They understood it as God's will and gladly approved of the offer and sent their daughter, as was asked. And Isaac married her, having now come into his inheritance, for the children of Keturah had gone off to their colonies.
This is a title
Shortly after this Abraham died. He was a man of incomparable virtue and honoured by God for his devotion to him. He lived in all for a hundred seventy and five years and was buried in Hebron, with his wife Sarah, by their sons Isaac and Ismael.
After Abraham's death, Isaac's wife conceived and when her belly grew very large Isaac was worried and enquired of God, who replied that Rebecca would bear twins, and that two nations would take the names of those sons, and that he who appeared the second would excel the elder.
A little later, as God had foretold, she bore twins; the elder of whom was very rough and hairy from head to foot, but the younger took hold of his heel as they were being born. The father loved the elder, named Esau, a name suited to his roughness, for the Hebrews call such a hairy roughness esauron, but Jacob the younger was more loved by his mother. When there was a famine in the land, Isaac resolved to go to Egypt, where things were good, but went to Gerar at God's command. Here Abimelech the king received him, because Abraham had formerly lived with him as his friend. But though he treated him kindly at first, he was unable to continue in it, through envy of him. For when he saw how God was with Isaac and took such care of him, he drove him away; and he, seeing the change in Abimelech, retreated to a place called the Valley, not far from Gerar. There, as he was digging a well, the shepherds attacked him and began fighting, hindering the work, and as he did not want to fight, they seemed to get the better of him.
So he retreated and dug still another, and when other shepherds of Abimelech began to be violent, he left that also, still retreating, and so won security for himself by prudent conduct. Finally they let him dig a well untroubled, which he named Rehoboth, which means spacious. The earlier wells he called Escon, which means battle, the other Stena, which means enmity.
Isaac's strength and possessions began to flourish, but Abimelech brooded about him, since their situation made them mutually suspect, and was secretly hostile for fear that their former friendship would not save him if Isaac were to recall the wrongs he had done him. So he renewed his treaty of friendship with him, through Philoch, one of his generals.
Having obtained everything he asked because of Isaac's good nature, who thought of the earlier friendship Abimelech had shown to him and his father rather than of his later anger towards him, he returned home.
Of the sons of Isaac, Esau, the father's favourite, at the age of forty, married Adah, the daughter of Helon and Aholibamah, the daughter of Esebeon, Canaanite nobles, making these marriages on his own authority, without asking his father's advice.
Isaac would not have approved, for he did not want any alliance with the people of that region, but not wanting to be at odds with his son by ordering him to set aside these wives, he resolved to be silent.
When he was old and completely blind, he called Esau to him and said that besides his sorrow at the ailment of his eyes, his old age hindered him from showing his devotion to God.
So he told him to go out hunting and when he had caught as much venison as he could, to prepare him a supper, and after this he would intercede with God to be his ally and helper all his life, for it was uncertain when he would die, but he wanted first by his prayers to obtain God's favour for him.
Esau then went out hunting.
But Rebecca preferred to have the prayer for God's favour applied to Jacob, so unknown to Isaac, she told him to kill some young goats and prepare a supper
and Jacob followed all of his mother's instructions.
When the supper was ready he took a goat's skin and put it around his arm, to make his father believe by its hairy roughness that he was Esau; indeed, as twins they were alike in everything except this, but he feared that his ruse might be discovered before the prayers and provoke his father to curse him. So he brought the supper to his father.
Detecting him by the sound of his voice, Isaac called his son to him, but when he reached to him his arm, wrapped in the goat-skin, he cried out, "You sound like Jacob, but by the thickness of your hair you seem to be Esau." So suspecting no deceit, he ate the supper and then turned to his prayers, calling on God and saying, "Lord of the ages and Creator of all, since it was you that provided my father a great store of good things and were pleased to bestow on me whatever I have and have promised your gracious aid to my descendants and to give them still greater blessings. Therefore confirm your word and do not neglect me in my present weakness, which makes me pray to you the more. Be gracious to this my son, and preserve him and save him from all that is evil. Give him a happy life in the possession of as many good things as your power can grant, making him feared by his enemies and honoured and loved by his friends."
Thinking he was praying for Esau he called on God in this way, and had just finished when Esau came in from hunting. When Isaac noticed his mistake he stayed silent, but Esau demanded the same blessing from his father that his brother had received.
When his father refused, since all his prayers had been poured out on Jacob, he lamented the mistake.
Then, being grieved at his tears, his father said that he would excel in hunting and strength of body, in arms and all such activities, and through them he and his descendants after him would win eternal glory, but that he would serve his brother.
Fearing his brother who wanted revenge, Jacob was saved by his mother, who persuaded her husband send him to Mesopotamia to find a wife among his relatives.
Already Esau had married Basemmath, the daughter of Ismael, without his father's consent, for Isaac did not like the Canaanites, so that he disapproved of Esau's former marriages, which was why he took Basemmath as wife, to please him and indeed he had a great affection for her. So Jacob was sent by his mother to Mesopotamia to marry the daughter of her brother, Laban, which Isaac agreed to at his wife's request. He journeyed through the land of Canaan, and because he hated the people of that region, he would not lodge with any of them, but lodged in the open air and laid his head on a heap of stones he had gathered. While asleep he saw a vision like this: He saw a ladder reaching from earth to heaven and upon the ladder persons descending who appeared more splendid than human beings, and finally God himself stood above it clearly seen by him and addressing him by his name, in these words:
"Jacob, it is not right for you, son of a good father and grandson of one with such a reputation for virtue, to be dejected by your present state, for you can hope for better times.
By my help you shall have an abundance of all good things. For it was I who brought Abraham here out of Mesopotamia, when he was driven away by his relatives, and I gave prosperity to your father, and will bestow no less upon yourself.
Take heart, therefore, and proceed on your journey under my guidance, for the marriage you are eager for will take place. You will have children of good character, whose number will be beyond counting, and they will leave their estate to even more numerous offspring, to whom and to whose descendants, I give the dominion of all the land. Their offspring will fill the entire earth and sea, so far as the sun shines on them. Do not fear any danger, or the many toils you must undergo, for by my providence I will direct what you are to do in the present and even more in the future." These were the predictions God made to Jacob. Heartened by what he had seen and heard, he poured oil on the stones where the prediction of such blessings was made. He also vowed to offer sacrifices upon them, if he returned with his life unharmed, and on this return he would give to God a tenth of all he had gained. He also judged the place to be sacred and named it Bethel, which in the Greek tongue translates as House of God.
So he journeyed to Mesopotamia and finally came to Haran, and at a well outside the town he met some shepherds along with some youths and girls sitting about. He stayed talking with them, wanting water to drink, and asking if they knew a certain Laban and was he still alive. They all said that yes, they knew him, for such a man was known to everyone there, and that his daughter pastured her father's flock along with them. They were surprised that she had not yet arrived, and said, "from her you may learn whatever details you want to know about that family." As they were saying this the girl arrived, and other shepherds came down along with her.
They pointed out Jacob to her as a stranger who came asking about her father's business.
This is a title
Innocently pleased at Jacob's coming, she asked him who he was and where he came from, and what had brought him there, and said she hoped they would be able to supply his needs.
Jacob was touched, less by the fact of their being relatives and the affection arising from this than by his love of the girl and his amazement at her beauty, which was in such bloom as few women of that age could rival.
He said, "if you are the daughter of Laban, there is kinship between you and me, from way before our births.
Abraham was the son of Terah, along with Haran and Nahor. Bethuel your grandfather was Nahor's son and Isaac my father was the son of Abraham and Sarah, the daughter of Haran. But there is a nearer and later bond of kinship between us,
for my mother Rebecca is sister to Laban your father, both by the same father and mother; therefore you and I are cousins. I have come now to greet you and to renew that bond which should be between us."
At the mention of Rebecca, the girl, as is wont to happen to youngsters, wept because of her fondness for her father and embraced Jacob, having learned about Rebecca from her father and knowing how her parents loved to hear her spoken of. After greeting him, she said that he brought the most welcome and highest pleasure to her father and all their family, for he was always mentioning Jacob's mother and thinking of her, and "in his eyes this will make you equal to any good you can think of." Then she told him to follow her to her father and deprive him no longer of the pleasure of meeting him.
With these words she brought him to Laban, and when his uncle recognised him, he felt secure and among his friends, and his unexpected arrival gave them great pleasure. After a few days, saying that he could not express in words his joy he had at seeing him, Laban asked why he had come, leaving his aged mother and father who needed his care, and promised him every help he needed.
Jacob explained the whole reason for his journey: how Isaac had twin sons, himself and Esau, and how, for missing out on his father's blessing, which he had gained through his mother's wisdom, his brother had sought to kill him for robbing him of the authority God would have given him and of the blessings for which their father prayed.
This was the reason for his coming here, at his mother's suggestion. "For we are all brothers, but our mother want a further union between our families; so I look to yourself and God for protection and feel safe in my present circumstances."
Laban promised to treat him with great kindness, both due to his ancestors and particularly for the sake of his mother, towards whom, he said, he would show his kindness, even though she were absent, by taking care of him, for he assured him he would make him the head shepherd of his flock and give him the authority for this and when he wanted to return to his parents, he would send him back with gifts suited to the nearness of their relationship. This Jacob heard gladly, and said he would willingly and gladly bear any sort of hardships to remain with them, but in return asked for Rachel as his wife, since she was dear to him for many reasons and not least because she was the means of his finding him. He said it was his love for the girl that drove him to make this proposal.
Laban was well pleased with this agreement and consented to give the girl to him, having desired no better son-in-law. He would agree to it if he would stay some time with him, not wanting to send his daughter to live among the Canaanites, for he regretted the alliance he had already made by letting his sister marry there.
Jacob consented to this, and agreed to stay seven years, determined to serve his father-in-law for so many years to show them his character and what sort of man he was. Accepting his terms, at the proper time Laban held the wedding-feast. But after nightfall, without Jacob's knowledge, he put his other daughter into bed to him, who was both older than Rachel and no beauty. Jacob lay with her that night, being both in drink and in the dark, but in the daylight he saw the injustice done to him and he rebuked Laban for it. He apologised but said he had to do it, for it was not from malice that he gave him Leah but as bound by another greater duty. Still, nothing stopped him from marrying Rachel, for he would give him her whom he loved, if he served another seven years. Jacob agreed, for his love for the girl gave him no alternative, and after another seven years he took Rachel as his wife.
Their father gave handmaids to each of them; Leah had Zilpha and Rachel had Bilha, who were not at all slaves, but servants. Now Leah was suffered keenly at seeing her husband's love for her sister, and thought she would be more honoured if she gave him children, so she constantly prayed to God.
When she had a son and it made her husband more attentive to her, she named the son "Rubel" because it showed God's mercy to her, for that is what the name means. After some time she had three more sons: Simeon, a name which means God heard her prayer, then Levi, the confirmer of their friendship, and after him Judas, which means thanksgiving. Fearing that her sister's fruitfulness would lessen her share of Jacob's affections, Rachel sent her serving girl Bilha to bed with him and by her Jacob had Dan, which in the Greek tongue means "divine judgment," and after him Nephthali, meaning "wily," since by him Rachel replied to the fruitfulness of her sister.
In the same way Leah replied to her sister, by sending her own serving girl to bed with him. Therefore by Zilpha Jacob had a son called Gad, meaning "fortune," and after him Asher, a "happy man," for he added to his mother's fame.
Rubel, Leah's eldest son, brought mandrake apples to his mother. When Rachel saw them she asked her for some, for she loved eating them, but Leah refused, saying she should be satisfied with having taken away her share of her husband's love. To soften her sister's anger Rachel said she would yield him to her and she could lie with her husband that evening. She accepted the offer and Jacob slept with Leah, by Rachel's favour. She had these sons: Issachar, denoting one "born by hire" and Zabulon, born as a "pledge of benevolence" towards her, and a daughter, Dinah. After some time Rachel had a son, named Joseph, which meant that another would be added to him. For all of this time, twenty years, Jacob fed the flocks of Laban his father-in-law, after which he asked his father-in-law for leave to take his wives and go home, and when his father-in-law would not let him, he planned to do it secretly.
He tested the feelings of his wives about this departure, and they accepted it gladly. Rachel took with her the images of the gods, which they used to worship in their own country and escaped with her sister, and their children and handmaids and possessions went along with them. Without fore-warning Laban, Jacob took away half the livestock
and the reason why Rachel took the images of the gods, although Jacob had taught her to scorn the worship of such gods, was that if they were followed and caught by her father, she could use these images to obtain his pardon.
Laban first heard of Jacob's and his daughters' departure a day later, and furiously pursued them with a band of men, and on the seventh day caught up with them as they rested on a hillside.
He did not confront them at once, for it was evening.
Then God stood beside him in a dream and warned him to treat his son-in-law and his daughters peaceably and not to do anything rash or angry to them, but to make peace with Jacob, warning that if he scorned their fewness, or was hostile to them, He would stand by them.
So forewarned, Laban called Jacob for a conversation next day and told him of his dream. Then he began to accuse him, how he had welcomed him when he was poor and in need and had given him plenty of everything he had. "I even gave you my daughters in marriage" he said, "and thought your goodwill for me would be greater than before;
but you cared neither for your mother's relationship to me, or for the new affinity between us, or about the wives you have married or the children, of whom I am the grandfather. Like an enemy, you drove away my livestock and persuaded my daughters to run away from their father,
and took away the paternal sacred images worshipped by my ancestors and by myself. You did this though you are my kinsman and my sister's son and husband of my daughters and were treated hospitably by me and ate at my table."
When Laban had spoken, Jacob defended himself. He was not the only one prompted by God to love his native land, for that was rooted in everyone, and after so long time, it was right for him to return to it.
"As for accusing me of theft, if anyone else were the arbitrator you would be found in the wrong, for instead of the thanks I should have from you for keeping your livestock and increasing them, how can you blame me for taking and keeping a small portion of them? As for your daughters, note that it is not through any trickery of mine that they follow me to my home, but from the proper affection of wives for their husband. They follow not so much myself as their own children."
This was his defense, to clear himself of having acted unjustly. To it he added his own complaint and accusation of Laban, "Though I was your sister's son and you gave me your daughters in marriage, you have worn me out with your harsh rules and kept me under them for twenty years. If what was required of me in order to marry your daughters was tolerable, after those marriages I had to bear what even an enemy would not impose." For Laban had certainly treated Jacob very badly.
When he saw God granting all his prayers that, as he had promised, of the young livestock to be born, he should have sometimes what was white in colour and sometimes what was black in colour,
but when those who should have been Jacob's share proved numerous, he did not keep his pledge, but promised to give them next year, envious of the abundance of his possessions. He made his promises, not expecting such increases, but when they appeared, he cheated him.
He told him to search for the sacred images, and when Laban agreed to search, Rachel heard it and putting the images into the saddle of the camel on which she rode, she sat on it and said that her natural period hindered her from getting up.
Laban gave up the search, not thinking that his daughter would go near those images in such a state. So he made an agreement with Jacob and bound himself on oath not to bear him any malice for what had happened, and Jacob promised to love the daughters.
These they swore on oath, which they confirmed by raising a pillar in the form of an altar. Therefore that hill is called Galades, from which they call that area the Galadene to this day; and when they had feasted after the swearing, Laban returned home.
As Jacob went on his journey to the land of Canaan, he had a vision, offering him good hope for his future, and that place he named the Camp of God.
Eager to know his brother's intentions towards him, he sent ahead to tell him everything in detail, being afraid on account of the former suspicions between them.
He told his envoys to tell Esau that Jacob thought it wrong to live near him while he was angry with him and had then left the region, but was now returning, assuming that his long absence had healed the rift between them. He was bringing with him his wives and children, and the property he had gained, and placed himself and what was dearest to him, into his hands, and would think it his greatest good fortune to share with his brother what God had given to him."
As they said this to him, Esau was very glad and came with four hundred men to meet his brother.
When he heard of him coming with so many men, Jacob was very afraid, but trusting in God he gave thought to how to save himself and his own in the circumstances, and defeat his enemies if they wanted to harm him.
So he divided his company and sent some on ahead, with the others close behind, so that if the first were overpowered by his brother's attack, they could take refuge among those who came after.
After setting his group in this order, he sent some of them to bring gifts to his brother.
This is a title
The gifts consisted of pack-animals and many quadrupeds of various kinds, which would be most acceptable to their recipients, who were short of them.
The messengers went at intervals, so that coming soon after each other, they might seem even more numerous, and on account of the gifts his anger, if he still felt it might be relaxed. The messengers were also instructed to speak courteously to him.
After spending the day arranging this he moved on with his group at nightfall, and when they had crossed over a river called the Jabacchos, Jacob stayed behind and met with an apparition, who began wrestling with him, but he defeated the apparition.
Then it raised its voice and spoke to him words of greeting, encourging him by the event and saying that his victory was a significant one, for he had overcome a divine messenger and should see it as a sign of great future blessings, and that his descendants would never fail and that nobody would excel him in power.
He told him to take the name Israel, which in the Hebrew tongue means one who struggled with an angel of God. He foretold these things at Jacob's request, for recognising him as an angel of God, he asked him to indicate what would happen to him later. After saying this to him, the apparition disappeared.
Delighted, Jacob named the place Phanuel, which means, the face of God.
This is a title
Since after the fight he felt pain around his broad sinew, he abstained later from eating that joint as food, and for his sake it is still not eaten by us.
Learning that his brother was near, he ordered his wives to go ahead of him, separately, with their handmaids, to observe the actions of the men, if Esau opted for battle. Then he went up to his brother and bowed down to him and the brother showed no evil intent.
Esau greeted him and asked him about the throng of children and the women. When he had heard all about them, he asked him to go with him to their father, but when Jacob claimed that the livestock were tired, Esau returned to his home in Seir, which he had named after his own shaggy hair.
Jacob next reached what still to this day are called the Tents and went on from there to Sikima, a city of the Canaanites. While the Sikimites were celebrating a festival, Jacob's only daughter, Dinah, went into the city to see the finery of the local women. When Sikima, son of Hamor the king, saw her, he defiled her by rape, and seized with love for the girl, asked his father to obtain her for him as a wife. Agreeing, he went to Jacob, requesting that his son Sikima be married to Dinah according to the law.
Not wishing to refuse such an eminent man and yet not thinking it right to marry his daughter to a foreigner, Jacob implored him to let him consult about his request.
The king left, hoping that Jacob would agree to the marriage, but Jacob told his sons of the defilement of their sister and of Hamor's request, and asked their advice on what to do. Most of them said nothing, not knowing what advice to give. But Simeon and Levi, the brothers of the girl by the same mother, agreed between themselves on the following action.
As it was during a festival, when the Sikimites were at leisure and feasting, they attacked the sleeping watchmen, and, coming into the city, killed all the males including the king and his son, but spared the women
and doing this without their father's consent, they took their sister back.
While Jacob was appalled at the grossness of this act and severely blamed his sons for it, God stood beside him and told him to take heart, and to purify his tents and offer the sacrifices he had vowed when he went first into Mesopotamia and saw his vision.
As he was purifying his followers, he found the gods of Laban; for he did not know Rachel had stolen them. He hid them in Sikima, in the ground under an oak-tree, and on leaving he offered sacrifice at Bethel, where he had earlier seen his dream when going to Mesopotamia.
Moving on from there he came to near Ephrata, where he buried Rachel, who had died in child-birth. She was the only one of Jacob's relatives not to have the honour of burial at Hebron. After mourning her a long time, he called the son she had borne Benjamin, for the sorrow his mother had with him.
These are all the children of Jacob, twelve males and one female.
Of them eight were legitimate, six by Leah and two by Rachel, and four were by the handmaids, two by each, all of whose names I have already given.
From there he went to Hebron, a city located among the Canaanites, where Isaac lived, and so they lived together for a short time; but Jacob did not find Rebecca alive. Not long after his son's return, Isaac himself died and was buried by his sons, alongside his wife, in their ancestral tomb in Hebron. Isaac was a man beloved by God who after Abraham his father received great signs of providence, and who lived to be very old, for when he had lived virtuously one hundred and eighty-five years, he died. After the death of Isaac, his sons moved away to live separately rather than stay on in the property they had acquired previously. Esau left the city of Hebron to his brother, and lived in Seir and ruled over Idumaea, calling the region after himself, for he was called Adom, a name that he got in this way:
During his youth, as he was returning very hungry from a hard day's hunting, he met his brother who was preparing a pot of the best red lentils for his dinner; and feeling a deep desire for them he asked for some of the food to eat.
The other took advantage of his brother's hunger and made him surrender his birthright to him and, compelled by his hunger, he handed it over to him on oath. Therefore, from the redness of this pottage, he was jokingly called by his mates, Adom, for that is the Hebrew for whatever is red. It was also the name given to the region, though the Greeks gave it the more elegant name of Idumaea.
He became the father of five sons, of whom Jaus and Lamus and Coreus were by one wife named Alibama, and Aliphaz was later born to him by Adasa and Raouel by Basamath.
Those were the sons of Esau. Aliphaz had five legitimate sons; Theman, Omer, Sophous, Jotham and Kanaz, for Amalek was not legitimate, but by a concubine named Thamnae.
These lived in the part of Idumaea which is called Gobolitis and the one named "Amalekitis" after Amalek, for Idumaea was a large region and had a single name, while its individual parts kept the names of the local inhabitants.
Jacob reached a level of prosperity rarely attained by anyone and was richer than the rest of the local inhabitants and envied and admired for having such virtuous sons, for they were lacking in nothing but were resilient and cheerful at manual work and also shrewd in intellect.
God's providential care for him and his welfare brought him such great blessings, even out of what seem the worst of conditions, and granted to our forefather and his descendants the exodus from Egypt, in the way that we shall relate.
This is a title
When Jacob's son Joseph was born to him by Rachel, his father loved him more than the rest of his sons for his physical beauty and the virtue of his soul, and his exceptional prudence.
His father's affection roused his brothers to envy and hate him; as also did the dreams which he saw and reported to his father and to them, foretelling his future success, for people are usually jealous of the success of even their nearest relatives. The visions which Joseph saw in his sleep were these:
When he was sent out along with his brothers by their father to gather in the harvest, he saw a vision in a dream that far surpassed the usual appearances which come when we are asleep, and when he got up he told it to his brothers, for them to judge what was meant by it. He told how during the night he had seen his own wheat-sheaf standing still just where he set it, while their sheaves ran to bow down to it, as servants bow down to their masters.
Noting how the vision foretold how he would gain power and wealth and how his power would surpass theirs, they made no comment to Joseph, as if they did not understand the dream, but prayed that none of what they suspected as its meaning would come true, and hated him still more on account of it. In response to their envy the Deity sent a second, more wonderful vision to Joseph, where it seemed to him that the sun took along the moon and the rest of the stars and came down to the earth and bowed down to him. Suspecting no ill-will from his brothers who were present, he told the vision to his father, asking him to explain its meaning.
Jacob was pleased with the dream, for shrewdly pondering the prediction he rightly guessed its meaning and was glad of the great things it signified, since it declared his son's future prosperity. By the blessing of God, the time would come when he would be honoured and venerated by his parents and brothers.
He reckoned that the moon and sun meant his mother and father; the one giving all things increase and nourishment, and the other shaping them and giving them other powers. The stars meant his brothers, eleven in number, like stars receiving their power from the sun and moon.
This was Jacob's shrewd judgment about the vision, but what he said caused great grief to Joseph's brothers, and made them feel alienated from him as if he kept for himself the good things his dreams signified, not sharing them in partnership as a brother should, for they who shared the same parentage should share in the same prosperity.
They resolved to kill the young man, and after agreeing on that intention, when they had gathered in the harvest they went to Sikima, which is a good region for feeding livestock and for pasturage. There they fed their flocks, without telling their father that they had gone there.
He was deeply worried at not knowing how they were and at receiving no message from the flocks with news about them; so, in his anxiety about them he sent Joseph to the flocks, to learn what had happened to his brothers and bring him word of what they were doing.
The brothers were glad to see him coming to them, not as for the arrival of a relative, or one sent by their father, but as an enemy whom Providence had put into their hands, and were eager to kill him and not let their opportunity slip. When the eldest of them, Ruben, saw their mood and how they planned to achieve their purpose, he tried to restrain them by showing the enormity of what they were about and its dreadfulness.
If it is a crime in the sight of God and men to murder even a person not related to them, how much more heinous and detestable is the slaughter of one's brother, by which a father is treated unjustly and a mother is grieved, lamenting that her son is taken away from her in an inhuman way.
So he implored them to respect their feelings and realise the harm caused to them by the death of so good a child, their youngest; and also to fear God, who saw and witnessed their plan against their brother; and how He would love them if they refrained from this act, yielding to repentance and good judgment.
If, however, they proceeded with the fratricide, all sorts of punishments would follow, for scorning God's ever-present eye which is nowhere blind to what is done, whether in solitude or in cities.
For wherever we are, we should know that God is also there.
He said that if they did this terrible thing they would have their own conscience as an enemy which cannot be dismissed, whether it be good or such as would haunt them if they killed their brother.
To all this he added that even if a brother had done them an injustice it was wrong to kill him, and that it is good not to remember the apparent sins of one's friends. Surely they would not kill Joseph, who had done them no harm, "since his junior status should rather elicit our mercy and move us to care for him." Their reason for killing him only made the act so much worse, since it was from envy at his future prosperity, in which they would have a share once he reached it, not as outsiders but as relatives.
They should reckon as their own whatever God gave to Joseph, and that they would provoke Him to anger if they killed one whom He judged worthy of the good things hoped for, since by killing him they would prevent God from bestowing them upon him.
Ruben said these and many other things, trying to divert them from fratricide. But seeing that his words had not mollified them and that they were in a hurry to be rid of him, he advised them to do a lesser evil, in the way they got rid of him. For as he had first urged them to refrain instead of taking revenge, now, since they insisted on disposing of their brother, he proposed a plan that would not be so gross a sin.
In their present distress it would be less grievously wrong and would achieve what they wanted.
They should not put their brother to death by their own hands, but throw him into the nearby cistern and so let him die without defiling their hands with his blood. To this the young men agreed, so Ruben took the lad and tied him with a rope and let him down gently into the cistern, which was dry; and then went off seeking pasturage for his flocks.
But after Ruben had left another of Jacob's sons, Judas, seeing some of the Arab descendants of Ismael bringing spices and Syrian wares from the Galadene to Egypt, advised his brothers to draw Joseph from the cistern and sell him to the Arabs,
for if he died far away among strangers, they would be innocent of this foul deed. This was agreed, so they drew Joseph up from the cistern and sold him to the merchants for twenty pounds. He was now seventeen years old.
Ruben had planned to save Joseph, and unknown to his brothers came back to the cistern by night. When he got no answer to his call he was afraid they had killed him after he had left, and protested to his brothers; but when they said what they had done, Ruben ceased his mourning.
When Joseph's brothers had done this to him, they considered what to do in order to avoid any suspicion from their father. When they let him down into the cistern they had taken the coat Joseph was wearing when he came to them, and torn it in pieces and dipped it in goats' blood and brought it back to show to their father, to make him believe he had been killed by wild beasts.
Then they came to the old man, but not before he had already learned what had happened to his son. They claimed not to have seen Joseph, nor to know what became of him, but that they found his coat bloody and torn to pieces, which made them suspect he had fallen among wild beasts and so met his death, if that was the coat he was wearing when he left home.
Up to then, Jacob had hoped that his son had only been taken prisoner, but now he set that idea aside and took the coat as a clear sign that he was dead, for he knew that this was the coat he was wearing when he sent him to his brothers. From then on he grieved for the lad as dead, without taking any comfort in the rest.
As though he were now the father of only one, he had grieved his loss before meeting Joseph's brothers, but now thought of Joseph as killed by wild beasts.
He sat down in sackcloth and heavy mourning, and found no comfort from his sons, nor did his grief ease with the passing of time.
Joseph was sold by the merchants and bought by the chief cook of king Pharaothes, an Egyptian named Pentephres, who held him in high esteem, gave him an education fit for a free man and assigned him better nourishment than was given to slaves, and entrusted to him the care of his house.
While enjoying these advantages, his changed condition did not draw him away from his previous virtue, but he showed how wisdom can govern life's unruly passions, in one who is really wise and does not merely put it on for a show in order to succeed.
For when his master's wife had fallen in love with him, both for his handsome appearance and his management skill, and thought that if she declared her love to him she could persuade him to make love to her and that he would regard himself as fortunate that his mistress should ask him,
Seeing only his state of slavery but not his moral character, which continued after his change of status, she revealed her feelings and spoke to him of intercourse; but he rejected her words, not thinking it true to his religion to yield in this, and do such an injury and insult to the man who had purchased him and given him such honours.
He urged her to govern her passion, showing the impossibility of what she desired, which he thought could be quelled if she had no hope of success. He himself would endure everything, he said, rather than be persuaded to it. Even though a slave like him should do nothing against the wishes of his mistress, he would be excused where his refusal was to this sort of command.
But Joseph's unexpected opposition stoked her love for him still further, and obsessed with this wicked passion, she resolved to achieve her goal by a second attempt.
As there was a public festival coming up, when it was customare for women to join the general assembly, she pretended to her husband to be sick, in order to gain the solitude and leisure to ask Joseph again, and finding it, she spoke to him more gently than before.
He really should have yielded to her first request, she said, and not have repulsed her, respecting the dignity of the one soliciting him and the heat of her passion, which drove his mistress to descend beneath her dignity, but now he should follow wiser counsel, and purge his previous foolishness.
Whether he was expecting her to repeat her request more warmly, now that she had pretended sickness on this account and preferred his company over the festival and its splendour, or whether he had at first rejected her overtures because he did not think she was serious, the fact that she now persisted with them was a sign that it was not a trap.
If he submitted to her, he would proceed to even more good things, but he must expect revenge and hatred from her if he rejected her desires, preferring his precious chastity above his mistress.
In that case he would gain nothing, because she would then accuse him and falsely pretend to her husband that he had attacked her chastity, and Pentephres would heed her words rather than his, no matter if they were far from the truth.
Though the woman said this with tears in her eyes, Joseph was neither swayed from his chastity by pity, nor compelled by fear to give in to her, but rejected her pleas and resisted her threats. He chose to suffer unjustly and bear the worst penalty rather than take an offer that in his conscience he knew would merit death.
This is a title
He reminded her that she should have intercourse only with her husband, and should prefer this to the brief pleasure of lust, which would only bring her regret and grief and could not be mended after the sin was done; and the fear of being caught, and how secrecy lasts only while the evil stays unknown.
With her husband she could enjoy intimacy without risk, and the security of a good conscience, in the sight of both God and other people. By preserving chastity, she could exercise authority over him better as his mistress than if both were ashamed of sinning together, for it is far better to know one has lived well than to have to rely on concealing evil.
By saying this and more, he tried to curb the woman's violent passion and to turn her feelings towards what was reasonable, but she grew more ungovernable and intense, and in despair of persuading him, she laid hands upon him to force him.
This is a title
But Joseph fled from her anger, leaving his garment behind in her grasp as he rushed from her chamber, and she was very afraid that he would tell her husband, and much insulted by the insult he had offered her. She resolved to accuse Joseph falsely to Pentephres and so to revenge herself on him for scorning her, considering it a wise and womanly thing to forestall his accusation.
So she sat in silent disarray, showing such anger that her sorrow for her frustrated lust, seemed to be for the attempt upon her chastity. When her husband came home he was troubled at how she looked and asked about the cause, she began to accuse Joseph and said, "My husband, you may die if you do not punish the wicked slave who has tried to defile your bed.
This is a title
He has forgotten who he was when he came to our house, so as to behave modestly, or the favours he had received from your bounty. What an ungrateful man he must be not to behave himself well toward us in all things. He planned to abuse your wife, availing of your absence during the festival. His former apparent modesty was only out of fear of you, but clearly he was not of good character.
This has come from his being honoured beyond his merits and his hopes, so he thought that being entrusted with your estate and your household and being set above your oldest servants, he might also be allowed to touch your wife."
When she finished talking, she showed him his garment, as though he had left it behind when he attempted to force her.
Pentephres, unable to disbelieve his wife's tears and what she said and what he saw, and misled by his love for his wife, did not set to examining the truth. Assuming his wife to be chaste and condemning Joseph as wicked, he threw him into prison for wrongdoing, and thought even more highly of his wife, praising her beauty and decency. Entrusting all his concerns to God, Joseph did not seek either to defend himself or to go into the details of what had occurred, but silently bore his chains and his plight, trusting that God, who knew the cause and the truth about his disaster was better than his captors.
And he soon had proof of providence, for noting his care and fidelity in the tasks given to him and the dignity of his bearing, the prison guard eased his chains and made his situation milder and more bearable for him, and also allowed him better rations than those of the other prisoners.
As is usual among partners in misfortune, when their chores were done, the prisoners turned to conversation and told each other the reasons why they were sentenced.
Among them the king's wine-waiter, once highly regarded but now imprisoned due to a fit of anger, shared a chain with Joseph and grew familiar with him and noting his intelligence, told him of a dream he had. He asked him to interpret its meaning, complaining that, on top of the penalty imposed by the king, the Deity was adding more anxieties by his dreams.
He said that in his sleep he saw three clusters of grapes hanging upon three branches of a vine, large and ready for picking, and that he squeezed them into a cup held by the king, and when he had strained the must he gave it to the king to drink, who took it with satisfaction.
He explained that this was what he saw, and asked him, if he understood such matters, what this vision foretold.
He told him to take heart and to expect to be set free from his chains in three days, for the king required his service and was about to restore him to it.
For God bestows the fruit of the vine for our good and wine is poured out for man and is the pledge of fidelity and friendship, resolving quarrels and banishing passion and grief from those who use it and giving them pleasure. "You say you squeezed this wine from three clusters of grapes with your hands, and gave it to the king. Then realise that this good vision granted to you predicts your release from this plight in the same number of days as the branches from which, in your sleep, you picked the grapes.
When it turns out so, remember that I predicted this good fortune for you, and when you are back in office, do not forget us here where you will leave us while you go to what we have foretold.
For we are not in prison for any crime.
It is because of virtue and self-control that we are condemned to suffer like criminals and because we were unwilling, for our own pleasure, to wrong the man who did this to us."
Of course, the wine-waiter was glad to hear this interpretation of his dream and looked forward to its coming true.
But another slave who had been a baker for the king was also a prisoner with the wine-waiter, and he took hope, hearing Joseph's interpretation of the other's vision, for he too had seen a dream. So he asked Joseph to tell him the meaning of what he had seen the night before. They were as follows
"I thought," he said "I was carrying three baskets on my head, two of them full of loaves and the third full of pastries and such other kinds of food as are prepared for kings.
Then birds flew up and ate them all, regardless of my efforts to drive them away."
He expected a prediction like that of the wine-waiter, but after pondering and thinking about the dream, Joseph told him he would rather interpret good things for him than those warned about in his dream. He said he had only two full days more to live, for that was what the baskets meant.
On the third day he would be crucified and become food for the birds, unable to help himself. Both outcomes were exactly as Joseph foretold, for on the predicted third day, when the king celebrated his birth-day, he crucified the chief baker, but set the wine-waiter free from his chains and restored him to his former service.
Without the wine-waiter giving him any help in memory of his predictions, Joseph was set free after bearing his chains for two years, for God devised this means of release for him.
On one single evening Pharaothes the king saw in his sleep two visions along with their meanings. Though he forgot the latter, he remembered the actual dreams and was troubled at what he had seen, for it seemed to him to portend no good for him. Next day he called together the wisest of the Egyptians to learn from them the meaning of his dreams.
When they were at a loss the king was even more troubled.
Seeing Pharaothes in turmoil the wine-waiter recalled the memory of Joseph and his understanding of dreams.
So he went to him to tell of Joseph and the vision he had seen in prison and how the upshot proved to be just as he had said; and how the chief baker was crucified on the same day, also according to Joseph's prediction, based on his dream.
He told how the man, born to a noble Hebrew family and whose father was renowned, was kept chained as a slave by the head cook, Pentephres. "If you just send for this man and not scorn his present misfortune, you will learn the meaning of your dreams." So the king told them to bring Joseph into his presence, and his servants went as ordered and having taken care of him, brought him in, according to the royal command.
The king took him by the hand and said, "Young man, my servant says you are now the best and most competent person I can consult; do me the same favour you did for my servant and tell me what is foretold by these visions in my sleep. I want you to suppress nothing out of fear, nor flatter me with lies designed to please.
I seemed to be walking along the river and saw seven well-fed cows of extraordinary size, going from the river to the marshland. The same number of other cows met them, coming from the marshes, emaciated and terrible to see, which ate up the fat, large cows and were still not improved, so wretchedly hollow were they with hunger.
After this vision I woke from sleep troubled and puzzling about what this fantasm could mean. Then I fell asleep again and saw another dream, far stranger than the former, which scared and troubled me still more.
I saw seven ears of corn growing from one root, weighed down and bent with fruit, which was now ripe and ready for reaping. Beside them I saw seven other ears of corn, thin and weak for lack of rain, which began eating and devouring the ripe ears, putting me in a state of shock."
After listening to him Joseph replied: "My king, although seen under two forms, this dream refers to the same future event. The sight of the cows, animals made for the plough and for toil, devoured by their inferiors,
and the ears of corn eaten up by the smaller ears, foretells famine and unfruitfulness for as many years as the former prosperity, for the plenty of these years will be eaten up by the same number of years of scarcity, when it will be very hard to get the necessaries of life. The sign of this is that the gaunt cows were still hungry after devouring the better ones. But God fore-shows the future to human beings not to grieve them but that by prudence they may lessen the experience they have foreseen. Therefore, if you carefully ration the plentiful crops to come in the first period, you will protect the Egyptians from feeling the effects of the coming disaster."
Amazed at the shrewdness and wisdom of Joseph, the king asked him in what way the harvests in the plentiful years should be administered, so as to make the time of barrenness more bearable.
This is a title
He proposed and advised that the good harvests should be set aside and the Egyptians not allowed to waste them, but to preserve for the time of need the surplus they would have wasted. He should take the corn from the farmers and give them only as much as they needed for food.
Pharaothes was so impressed not only by Joseph's explanation of the dream but by his advice that he entrusted him with the administration, with the power to do whatever he thought would be best for the people of Egypt and the king, believing that he who first thought out this plan would be the best for carrying it out.
With this authority given him by the king and permission to use his seal and wear the purple, Joseph drove in his chariot through all the land of Egypt and took the corn of the farmers, allotting to each enought for seed and for food, but without telling anyone the reason why he did so.
He had now passed his thirtieth year and enjoyed great honours from the king, who called him Psothom-Phanech, in view of his mighty intellect, for the name means the Discoverer of Secrets. With the king's help he also made a very fine marriage, espousing the daughter of Pentephres, one of the priests of Heliopolis; she was a virgin named Asenethis. By her he had children before the scarcity began: Manasses, the elder, whose name means "cause of forgetfulness," for his present prosperity made him forget his former troubles, and the younger Ephraim, meaning "restored," because he was restored to the freedom of his ancestors.
When Egypt had happily spent seven years, according to Joseph's interpretation of the dreams, famine seized them in the eighth year. And as this misfortune came on them unforeseen, they felt it all the worse and came running to the king's gates. He called on Joseph, who sold them corn and was publicly praised as the people's saviour. Not only did he open this market for the local people, but foreigners also could buy it, since Joseph held that all who are naturally akin to each other should receive help from those who lived in prosperity.
When Jacob learned that the corn market was open to foreigners, he sent all his sons into Egypt to buy corn, for Canaan was grievously hit by the famine, and the misery afflicted the whole region.
He kept back only Benjamin, born to him by Rachel and who had the same mother as Joseph.
These then came into Egypt and asked Joseph's permission to buy corn, for nothing of this kind was done without his approval. Even showing honour to the king himself was of benefit only to those who also showed homage to Joseph.
He recognised his brothers, but they never thought about him, for he was only a youth when he left them and he now had reached an age when his features had changed. His rank prevented them from suspecting his identity, so he was not known by them, and he began testing their feelings about the whole affair.
He refused to sell them corn and said they had come to spy upon the king's business. He alleged that they had come from several countries and banded together, pretending to be relatives, for it was difficult for a king, let alone an individual man to rear so many fine-looking sons as this.
He did this to find out about his father and what had happened after his own departure, and wanting to know what had become of his brother Benjamin, for he feared that they had dared to rid the family of him, as they had done to him.
They were quaking with fear and thought themselves in great danger, never thinking him to be their brother, but rejecting his charges against them. They made their defense using Rubel, the eldest, as their spokesman.
"We did not come here," he said, "with any bad intention, or to harm to the king's business in any way, but merely to save our lives, hoping that your kindness might provide us a respite from the woes of our country; for we heard of your selling corn, not only to your own countrymen, but also to strangers and so providing a means of survival to all in need of it. That we are brothers and of the same common blood, the features of our faces plainly show, since we are so alike. Our father's name is Jacob, a Hebrew, to whom we twelve children were born by four wives, and we were happy while all twelve of us were alive. However, when Joseph, one of our brothers, died, our affairs changed for the worse.
Our father mourned a long time for him and we are saddened both by our brother's death and the old man's misery.
Now we come to buy corn, having entrusted the care of our father and charge of the household, to our youngest brother, Benjamin. You have only to send to our house, to learn if there is any falsehood in what we say."
In this way Rubel tried to persuade Joseph to think better of them. But learning that Jacob was alive and that his brother was not dead, he put them in prison, as though to examine them at leisure.
On the third day he brought them out and said, "Since you insist that you come with no malice towards to the king's realm and that you are brothers born to the father you spoke about, you can convince me of this by leaving with me one of your company, who will not be maltreated here. Then if, after bringing corn to your father, you return to me with you your brother, whom you say you left there, to support the truth of what you say."
This grieved them more and they wept and began blaming each other for Joseph's fate, saying that this misery was God's punishment for their plots against him. Rubel sharply rebuked them that this repentance came too late to help Joseph. He urged them to patiently bear whatever they might suffer, since it was God's vengeance for him.
This is how they spoke to each another, not imagining that Joseph understood their language.
At Rubel's words sadness and remorse gripped them for what they had done, and they condemned the wrong for which God was justly punishing them.
Seeing them so distressed, Joseph was moved to tears, but not wanting it noticed by the brothers, he withdrew and after a while returned to them again.
Then taking Symeon as a hostage for the brothers' return, he bade them take the corn they had bought and leave, telling his steward to secretly put the money they had brought to purchase the corn into their sacks and to dismiss them with it, and these orders he duly carried out.
When Jacob's sons returned to Canaan, they told their father what had happened to them in Egypt and how they were suspected as spies against the king, and how they had said they were brothers and had left their eleventh brother behind with their father, but were not believed, and how they had left Symeon behind with the ruler, til Benjamin should go there and prove what they said was true.
They begged their father to fear nothing, but to send the lad with them. But Jacob was not pleased with what his sons had done; he took hard the detention of Symeon and thought it foolish to hand over Benjamin too. Rubel implored him in vain, offering his own sons in exchange, saying that their grandfather could kill them in reprisal, if any harm came to Benjamin in the journey. They did not know what to do, being futher troubled when the money was found hidden in their sacks of corn.
Yet when the corn they had brought gave out and they were still under the famine, Jacob was forced to send Benjamin with his brothers,
since there was no returning to Egypt without bringing what they had promised. As things grew daily worse and his sons continued to beg him, he had no other choice in the circumstances,
for Judas, who was of daring temperament in other things, spoke his mind freely to him, not to be afraid on account of to his son, or go on suspecting the worst, for nothing would happen his son but what God sent, which would equally happen if he stayed home with him.
He ought not, out of unreasonable fear for his son Benjamin, condemn them to certain death, depriving them of the abundant food they could have from Pharaothes. He should rather care for Symeon's safety, and not let him die by delaying Benjamin's journey. Let him entrust him to God, for he would either bring his son back to him safe, or would lay down his own life along with him. Jacob was finally persuaded and gave Benjamin to them, along with double the price of the corn. He also sent gifts to Joseph of the fruits of the land of Canaan, balsam and myrrh, and turpentine and honey. Their father shed many tears at the departure of his sons, and so did they.
His care was to receive his sons back safe after their journey, and theirs was to find their father still well and not stricken with grief on their behalf. This grieving lasted all day, and the old man was left behind mournful, but they went to Egypt, trying to ease their grief at their present troubles with the hope of a better future. On reaching Egypt, they were brought to Joseph, deeply afraid of being accused about the price of the corn, as if they had done wrong. They made profuse apology to Joseph's steward, saying how on arriving home they found the money in their sacks and that they were now bringing it back.
He said he did not know what they meant, and so relieved them of that fear, and after releasing Symeon and giving him clothing, he allowed him to be with his brothers. Meanwhile Joseph came from attending on the king, so they offered him their gifts, and when he asked them about their father, they replied that they found him well.
He asked whether the one he had seen was Benjamin, their younger brother.
When they said he was, he replied that the God who is over all was his protector.
But his affection for him made him shed tears, and he hid himself, not wanting his brothers to see him. Then he took them to supper and they sat just as they used to sit at their father's table. And while he treated them all kindly, Joseph honoured Benjamin with double of what the other guests got.
When after supper they had gone off to sleep, Joseph ordered his steward to give them their measures of corn and to hide the money again in their sacks, and put into Benjamin's sack his favourite golden cup from which he liked to drink.
This he did to test whether his brothers would help Benjamin when he was accused of theft and seemed in danger, or if, innocent themselves, they would abandon him and return to their father.
When the servant did as he was told, the sons of Jacob, knowing nothing of it, went their way and took Symeon with them and had a double cause for joy, in getting him back and taking Benjamin back to their father as they had promised.
But soon a cavalry troop surrounded them, with Joseph's servant, who had put the cup in Benjamin's sack.
They were troubled by the unexpected cavalry, and asked why they came in this way against those whom not long before their master had honoured with a hospitable reception?
He replie that they were wicked wretches who had forgotten the kind hospitality Joseph had shown them and did not scruple to harm him by stealing the very cup from which he had so amicably drunk to them. Had they no regard for their friendship with Joseph, or the risk they ran if they were caught, compared with their wrongful gain? He threatened them with punishment, for though they might escape the notice of a servant, yet they had not escaped God's notice, nor gotten away with the theft. "They ask, indeed, why we have come after them, as if they knew nothing of it!" - but when they were punished they would know it! This and more the servant said, insulting them. But unaware of the situation they laughed at what the servant said and were amazed at his abusive language, boldly accusing men who previously did not even keep the price of their corn, which was found in their sacks, but brought it back again, although nobody else knew anything about it, so far were they from any harmful intentions.
But thinking that a search would vindicate them more than mere denial of the fact, they invited him to search. In no way aware of any crime, and thinking it quite safe, they said that if any of them were found guilty of theft, he could punish them all! He said that yes, a search would be made, but the punishment would apply only to the one found guilty of the theft.
So they searched, and finally came to Benjamin, knowing it was in his sack they had hidden the cup, and indeed the rest were only searched in pretence.
They had no fear for themselves and were now concerned only about Benjamin, still feeling sure that he too would be found innocent, and they reprimanded their pursuers for delaying them, since they might have meanwhile gone a good part of their journey.
But on searching Benjamin's sack, they found the cup and took it from him and all was changed into mourning and lamentation. They rent their clothing and wept for the penalty their brother must suffer for his theft, and for misleading their father with their promise to bring Benjamin safely back to him.
Their misery was sharper because this awful thing came when they thought they were in the clear, but they confessed that their brother's misfortune, and the grief of their father for him, was their fault, since it was they who pressed their father to send him along, against his wishes.
The cavalry took Benjamin and brought him to Joseph, while his brothers followed him and seeing him in chains and them in mourning dress, he said, "Vile wretches, what strange notion have you of my kindness to you and of God's providence? Is this your return to me for treating you so hospitably?"
So, in order to save Benjamin, they gave themselves up to be punished, remembering the outrages they had done to Joseph. They also said that, if he was dead, he was better off than themselves, set free from the miseries of this life, and if he were alive, he could enjoyed the pleasure of seeing them punished by God. They added that they were a plague on their father, now adding this grief for Benjamin to his former grief for Joseph, and Rubel was loud in blaming them.
But Joseph dismissed them, declaring that they had committed no offense and that he would be content with punishing the lad. He said it was not right to let him go free just because the otherse were innocent, nor should they be punished along with the one who had stolen. When he promised to let them leave in safety, the rest of them were woebegone and unable to speak for sadness. But Judas, the very courageous man of action who had persuaded their father to send the boy off, decided to risk himself for the survival of his brother. "It is true, lord ruler," he said, "that we have been very wicked with regard to you, and deserve punishment on account of it. We may all be justly punished, though the theft was not committed by all, but only by the youngest of us. Yet still we have hope in our despair, for your goodness offers us a refuge from our present danger.
I beg you not to consider our unworthiness or our crime but your own excellent nature; take advice from your own virtue, not from that anger you have against us-a passion indulged by those who otherwise are of lower character, as they apply their power not only on great, but also on very trifling occasions. Overcome that passion, sir, and do not be subdued by it, nor let it kill those who cannot protect their own safety, but wish to accept it from you.
Indeed, this is not the first time that you will grant it on us, but earlier, when we came to buy corn, you gave us great plenty of food and allowed us to bring as much home to our family as has saved them from dying by famine.
There is no difference between neglecting men who were dying for lack of necessities, and not punishing those apparent offenders who have so unfortunately lost the benefit of that glorious goodwill you showed them. This will be an instance of equal favour, though bestowed in a different way.
In this way you will save those whom you fed in the other and by your bounty you will keep alive those souls whom you did not allow to be ruined by famine. Indeed it is a wonderful and a great thing to sustain our lives with corn and, now in our distress, bestow on us that pardon by which we may continue those lives.
I may suppose that, by bringing us to this disaster, God is giving you a chance to show your virtue so that it may be seen how you can forgive wrongs done to yourself and show benevolence to those who, in various ways, need your help.
For it is a fine thing to do good to those who are in need, but a still more glorious one to save those who deserve to be punished for offenses against yourself.
For if it is commendable to forgive and overlook people's small offenses, to restrain one's passion towards the guilty whose very life is at stake is to be like the most excellent nature of God himself. For myself, if our father had not shown at Joseph's death how terribly he feels the loss of his children, I would say nothing about sparing our own lives, other than that it would be a fine quality in yourself to spare those who would have nobody to mourn them after their death; but we would yield ourselves to whatever you wish. But now (for we do not plead for mercy for ourselves, even if we die so young before having properly enjoyed life,) thinking of our father and out of pity for his old age, we petition you for his sake. We beg for our lives, which our wrongdoing has made liable to your punishment.
He is neither a criminal himself nor did he raise us to be wicked, but a good man who should not have to bear such trials, and now while we are away, he suffers from anxiety for us; and if he hears of our death and the reason for it, he will die.
The ignominy of our ruin will be the death of him, for he will hurry from from this life into insensibility, before the sad story of our end is heard in the rest of the world.
In light of this, although our misdeed now infuriates you, forgive it for our father's sake, and let your pity for him outweigh our wickedness. Pity his old age, who if we die, will be lonely while he lives and will soon die too, and grant it in honour of fathers.
By this you will honour him that begot you, as well as yourself, who are already a father. For it you will be protected unharmed by God, the Father of all, for joining him in cordially showing mercy to our father, so that he is not bereft of his sons!
It is in your power to concede to us what God has given us, though you have the right to take it away, and so to resemble him in charity, for it is good to use on the merciful side the power to give or take away, and though you have the power to kill, to forget that you have it and to see yourself as only given power for saving others, and that the more one uses this power, the better reputation he gains. You will save us all by forgiving our brother his misfortune, for we cannot go on living if he is put to death, since we dare not show ourselves alive to our father without our brother, but must here share in his fate. So we beg you, general, if you condemn our brother to die, to punish us along with him, as partners in his crime.
This is a title
We do not wish to live only in order to die of grief at our brother's death but would rather die as equally guilty with him.
Remember that he was young and immature when sinned and how one naturally forgives such young persons. I end here and will say no more than this: if you condemn us, it may be what I have failed to say that brings this severity on us,
but if you set us free, let it be attributed to your own goodness, aware that you freed us from condemnation, not merely by sparing us but by granting us to appear more righteous than we really are, finding more reasons than ourselves to save us.
So if you wish to execute him, lay the penalty on me instead and send him back to his father.If you intended to keep him with you as a slave, I am fitter for you in that capacity too, for you see I am more suited for either of those penalties."
So Judas, being quite willing to undergo anything for the saving of his brother, fell down at Joseph's feet, struggling to assuage his anger and pacify him. And all his brothers fell down before him, weeping and offering themselves up to destruction for the sake of Benjamin.
But Joseph, by now overcome by his feelings and no longer able to play the part of an angry man, ordered all present to leave, in order to make himself known to his brothers in private. When the rest had left he made himself known to his brothers, saying,
"I commend your virtue and your kindness to our brother and find you better men than I could have expected after what you did to me. Indeed, I did all this to test your brotherly love, so I believe you were not wicked by nature in what you did to me, but that all has happened according to the will of God, who secures our enjoyment of the good things we have, and, if his favour continues to us, our future good too.
Therefore since I know that our father is safe and well beyond what I expected and I see you so good to your brother, I will no longer remember your sin against me, and end my grievance, and rather thank you for playing your part in God's plan to bring things to their present state.
I want you also to forget about it, since that foolishness of yours led to such a happy ending, rather than be ill-at-ease and ashamed of your offenses.
Do not now grieve about the sentence you passed on me or the bitter remorse of it, since what you planned did not happen.
So go your way with joy at what divine Providence has done and tell it to your father, lest he fade away with worry on your behalf and deprives me of the best part of my happiness and dies before he comes into my sight and tastes the good things we now enjoy.
Bring our father and your wives and children and all your relatives and come and live here, for it is not right for those dearest to me to live far from me, now that my affairs are prospering, especially when they have five more years of famine to come."
Saying this, Joseph embraced his brothers, who were in tears and sorrow, but their brother's goodwill seemed to leave no fear of their being punished for what they had conspired and done against him and they were elated.
The king, when he heard that Joseph's brothers had come to him, was as glad as if it had been his personal good fortune, and gave them wagons full of corn and gold and silver, to bring to their father.
After receiving still more from their brother, some for their father and some as gifts for each of them, with Benjamin getting even more than the rest, they left.
When on his sons' return Jacob learned that Joseph not only had escaped the death his father had been mourning for so long, but actually lived in splendor and prosperity, ruling Egypt alongside its king, who had entrusted almost everything to his care, he no longer considered anything to be incredible, in light of the greatness of the works of God and his kindness to him, though at times it was less visible; so he instantly and eagerly set out to go to Joseph. When he reached the Well of the Oath he offered sacrifice to God, afraid that the prosperity in Egypt might tempt his descendants to fall in love with it and settle in it and no more think of moving to the land of Canaan and possessing it, as God had promised them.
He also feared that if this descent into Egypt was against the will of God, his family might be destroyed and he might depart this life before seeing Joseph again. Revolving these doubts in his mind, he fell asleep.
But God stood near him and twice called him by name, and as he asked who he was, said, "Surely Jacob, you cannot fail to know the God who has always protected and helped your ancestors, and now you too.
For when your father would have denied you the leadership, I gave it to you, and it was by my kindness that, when you were sent all alone into Mesopotamia, you met good wives and returned with many children and much wealth.
Your whole family has been upheld by my providence, and it was I who led Joseph, your son, whom you gave up for lost, to enjoy such great prosperity as lord of Egypt that he differs but little from a king.
I now come as a guide to you in this journey, and foretell that you will die in the arms of Joseph: and that your descendants shall be in authority and glory over long ages, as I will settle them in the land which I have promised."
Encouraged by this dream, he set off more cheerfully for Egypt with his sons and all belonging to them, who were seventy in all. I once thought it best not to set down the names of this family, mainly on account of their difficulty.
But now I think it necessary to mention the names, to rebut those who claim we originally came not from Mesopotamia but from Egypt. Now Jacob had twelve sons, of whom Joseph had gone ahead; and we will set down the names of his children and grandchildren.
Rubel had four sons, Anoch, Phallu, Assaron and Charmi.
Simeon had six, Jamuel, Jamin, Avod, Jachin, Soar and Saul.
Levi had three, Gersom, Caath and Merari.
Judas had three, Sala, Phares and Elelos, and by Phares two grandchildren, Esron and Amour.
Issachar had four, Thoulas, Phrouras, Jobos and Samaron. Zabulon had three, Sarad, Helon and Jalel. Thus far, the descendants of Leah and with her was her daughter Dinah, thirty-three in all. Rachel had two sons, one of whom, Joseph, also had two sons, Manasses and Ephraim. The other, Benjamin, had ten sons, Bolos, Baccharis, Asabel, Gelas, Naaman, Jes, Aros, Nomphis, Oppais and Arod. These fourteen added to the thirty-three above-listed, amount to forty-seven.
These were the legitimate descendants of Jacob. Besides, he had by Bilhah, the serving girl of Rachel, Dan and Nephthali, who in turn had four sons to follow him, Eliel, Gounis, Sares and Sellimos. Dan had just one son, Ousis. Along with the above-named, these add up to fifty-four. Gad and Asseron were the sons of Zilpha, Leah's serving girl. Gad had seven children, Sophoniah, Ougis, Sunis, Zabrona, Irene, Eroides and Ariel. Aseron had a daughter, Sarah and six boys, whose names were Jomnes, Isousios, Ioubes, Baris, Abaros and Melchielos.
If we add these, which are sixteen, to the fifty-four, the cited number is complete, without including Jacob himself.
This is a title
When Joseph learned that his father was coming, for his brother Judas went ahead to announce his approach, he went out to meet him and they met together at the City of Heroes.
At this great and unexpected joy, the old man almost passed away, but Joseph revived him, though he too could not restrain a similar passion of delight, but he was not as overcome by feeling as was his father.
Then he bade them to travel on slowly, while he himself took five of his brothers and hurried to the king, to announce the arrival of Jacob and his family. He was glad to hear this news and asked Joseph what sort of life his brothers liked to lead, so as to let them continue it. He replied that they were good shepherds, who were used to no other employment, so he provided that they should not be separated, but live in the same region and take care of their father. He also took care that they should be acceptable to the Egyptians, by doing no activity that would interfere with theirs, for the practice shepherding was forbidden to the Egyptians.
After Jacob had met and greeted the king and wished prosperity to his realm, Pharaothes asked him how long he had now lived. When he replied a hundred and thirty years, he wondered at Jacob's longevity, but he replied that still he had not lived as long as his ancestors. Then he let him and his children live in Heliopolis, the city where the royal shepherds had their pasturage. But the famine extended to the Egyptians and their plight grew more insoluble as the river did not flood; for it had ceased to rise and God send no rain, and they had made no preparations, unsure of what to do. Then Joseph sold them corn for their money, and when their money failed they bought corn with their cows and their slaves.
Any of them who had a small piece of land gave it up to purchase food, so that the king became owner of all their property, and they were moved here and there so that their land came firmly into the king's possession, except that of the priests, which continued to be their own.
This is a title
The crisis enslaved their minds as well as their bodies, and finally forced them to obtain food by shameful means.
When the misery ceased and the river overflowed the ground, so that it again became very fruitful,
Joseph went to every city and assembled the people and gave them back entirely the land which, with their own consent, the king alone might have possessed and enjoyed, urging them to look on it as the possession of all, and to set cheerfully about their farming, paying as a tax to the king one fifth of the fruits of the land which the king, when it was his, restored to them. These were glad at unexpectedly recovering their lands and willingly accepted this decree, by means of which Joseph achieved for himself a greater authority among the Egyptians and gained their greater love toward the king. This law, taxing a fifth part of their fruits, continued to later kings.
When Jacob had lived seventeen years in Egypt, he fell ill and died in the presence of his sons, having prayed for their prosperity and foretold in prophecy how each of them would fare in the land of Canaan, as happened many years later.
He also praised Joseph highly, for not holding his brothers evil doings against them, but treating them kindly, with such gifts as men seldom give even to their benefactors. He told his own sons to count Joseph's sons, Ephraim and Manasses, among their number and give each of them a share in the land of Canaan, as we shall later describe.
With a request to be buried at Hebron, he died, when he had lived full a hundred and fifty years, less three, having been second to none of his ancestors in religious devotion and having a fitting reward for such goodness. With the king's permission, Joseph brought his father's corpse to Hebron and buried it there, in costly style.
His brothers were at first unwilling to return with him, afraid of being punished for their plotting, now that their father was dead, for whose sake he had been gracious to them. But persuading them not to fear and not suspect him of this, he brought them with him and lavished them with property and never ceased to be actively concerned for them.
Joseph himself died aged a hundred and ten, a man of admirable virtue who conducted all his affairs by reason, and used his authority fairly, which was why he enjoyed such fortune among the Egyptians, though he came from another country in such a pitiful state, as we have said.
His brothers also died, after living happily in Egypt.
Some time later their children and descendants brought their bodies to Hebron and buried them there.
But later they brought the bones of Joseph into the land of Canaan, when the Hebrews left Egypt, as Joseph had made them swear to do. I will tell later what happened each of them and of their laborious capture of the land of Canaan, but first I must tell how they left Egypt.
The Egyptians grew too soft and lazy for hard work and went in pursuit of pleasures instead, and were devoted to profit. They grew harsh towards the Hebrews, envying their prosperity.
Seeing how through their virtue and love of toil the Israelite nation flourished and grew very wealthy, they regarded their increase as a loss to themselves. Over a long time they forgot what they had gained from Joseph, since the crown had passed to another family, and they much abused the Israelites and devised many ways to afflict them.
They made them cut many channels and walls and earthworks for the river in their cities, to prevent its waters from stagnating after it had overflowed its banks. They also wore them out with building pyramids, forcing them to learn all sorts of arts and grow used to hard labour.
Four hundred years they spent under these sufferings in mutual conflict, the Egyptians wanting to destroy the Israelites by these labours and the Israelites wanting to hold out under them to the end.
While they were in this state, something came up that made the Egyptians wish all the more to obliterate our nation. One of their sacred scribes, adept at foretelling the future, told the king that about this time an Israelite child would be born who if he were reared, would bring down the Egyptians' rule and raise up the Israelites. He would excel all people in virtue and win a glory that would be remembered through all ages.
This was so feared by the king that, following the man's opinion, he ordered them to throw every male child born to the Israelites into the river and destroy it. Besides, the Egyptian midwives should watch the Hebrew women in labour and observe what is born,
and those women assigned to the office of midwives among them, because of their relationship with the king, would not transgress his commands.
He ordered also, that if any parents disobeyed him and dared to save their male children alive, they and their families should be killed.
This was a severe hardship to those subject to it, not only by losing their sons and making the parents act to destroy their own children, but also as it was meant to wipe out their nation. To see the destruction of their children and their own gradual extinction was a hard and inconsolable disaster to them.
Such was their state at the time. But none can resist God's purposes, even by devising thousands of subtle ways. For the child foretold by the sacred scribe was reared, concealed from the king's guards, and the predicter made no mistake about what his survival would mean, as we shall see. Amram, one of the noblest of the Hebrews, feared that his whole nation would die out for lack of young men to carry it on, and was agitated as his wife was with child and he did not know what to do.
So he devoted himself to prayer to God, imploring him to pity those who had broken none of the laws of his worship and to rescue them from their present affliction and thwart their enemies' hopes of destroying their nation.
And God had mercy on him and listened to his prayer, standing beside him in his sleep and urging him not to despair of his favour in the future. He added that he did not forgotten their piety towards him and would always reward them for it, as in the past he had favoured their ancestors and made them increase from a few to so great a number.
He reminded him that when Abraham had come alone from Mesopotamia into Canaan, he had prospered him in various ways, and that when his wife was at first barren, he had later enabled her to conceive seed and to bear him sons. He had left the region of Arabia to Ismael and his descendants, and Troglodytis to his sons by Ketura, and Canaan to Isaac.
"By my help," he said, "he did great exploits in war, which, unless you are impious, you must still remember. Jacob too became well known to strangers by the greatness of the prosperity he enjoyed and which he left to his sons, who came into Egypt with no more than seventy souls, while you have now become more than six hundred thousand. Know that I will provide for the common good of you all, and for your personal fame.
This child, whose birth the Egyptians so fear that they have doomed the Israelite children to destruction, will be this child of yours, who shall be hidden from those who watch to destroy him.
When he has been surprisingly reared, he will save the Hebrew nation from the hardship they suffer from the Egyptians. His fame will last as long as the world, not just among Hebrews but also among foreigners, because of my favour to you and your descendants. His brother, too, shall gain my priesthood, and his descendants after him shall have it to the end of the world.
When the vision had told him of these things, Amram woke up and told it to Jochebed his wife, and their fear increased due to the prediction in Amram's dream.
They were anxious, not only for the child, but about the great prosperity that was to come.
But his mother's labour confirmed the prediction of God, for it was hidden from those who watched her, as her pains were light and the throes of delivery did not fall violently upon her. They nourished the child at home secretly for three months, but later Amram was afraid of being found out, and that, falling under the king's displeasure, both he and his child would die and so nullify the promise of God. So he decided to entrust the child's safety and care to God, rather than concealing him, which he saw as a risk that endangered both himself and the child, so secretly nourished.
He reckoned that God would somehow keep it quite safe and not let his prediction be false. With that thought they made a little boat of bullrushes, like a cradle, large enough to hold an infant, and daubed it with tar, to keep the water from entering between the bulrushes. Then they set the infant in it and putting it afloat upon the river, left its survival to God. The river received the child and carried him along, but the child's sister Miriam went along upon the bank opposite him, as her mother told her, to see where the ark would be carried.
God then showed that human wisdom can do nothing while He can do anything for a good purpose and that those who to save their own lineage condemn others to destruction, fail in it no matter what they do,
while others are amazingly spared and by God's guidance find the way to prosper almost from the heart of their troubles.
An instance of this happened in the case of the child, and demonstrates God's power.
Thermuthis, the king's daughter, was playing on the banks of the river, and seeing the cradle carried along by the current, sent swimmers to bring the cradle to her. When the ones sent came back with the cradle and she saw the little child, she was lovestruck by it, for its size and beauty.
Since God had formed Moses with such care as made him seem worthy of bringing up and providing for, even by those who had resolved to destroy of the rest of the Hebrew nation, Thermuthis told them to bring her a woman who could breast-feed the child. However, when he was placed there he would not take the breast, but turned away from it and did the same to many other women. Miriam was nearby when this happened, not seeming to be there on purpose, but only staying to see the child, and she said, "It is useless, my queen, to call for these women who are not related to the child, to nourish it.
But if you have one of the Hebrew women come, perhaps it may take the breast from one of its own nation." As it seemed good advice, she told her to find and bring one of them who could give suck, and with this authority she returned and brought the mother, who was known to nobody there. The child gladly clung to her breast, and at the queen's request, the nursing of the child was entirely entrusted to her.
That is how they gave him his name, from the fact of being placed in the river, for the Egyptians call water by the name of Mou, and those saved from it are called eses. Putting the two words together, they gave him this name.
As God foretold, he was recognised by all as the best of the Hebrews, for greatness of mind and for enduring hardships. Descended from Abraham seven generations back, Moses was the son of Amram, and Caath's father Levi was the son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham.
Moses was intelligent beyond his age, and grew far beyond that again, and his deeds as a child gave promise of greater things when he came to manhood.
Already when he was only three years old, God made him remarkably tall.
As to his beauty, on seeing Moses, there was nobody so unpolite as not to be touched by his fine appearance. Many who met him as he was carried along the road had to turn around for another look at the child, leaving what they were about to get a good look at him, his childhood charm was so remarkable that it held the viewers against their will.
Thermuthis was not blessed with children, and when she saw what a child he was, she adopted him as her son. Once she brought Moses to show to her father, with a view to making him her successor, if the Deity should will she had no legitimate child of her own. She said, "I have reared a child of divine appearance, with a generous mind, and receiving him from the bounty of the river, I thought to adopt him my son and heir to your kingdom." Saying this, she placed the infant in her father's hands, who took him and hugged him to his breast, and for his daughter's sake jokingly put his crown on him. But Moses took it off and threw it on the ground, and kicked it around playfully, as a child might do.
This seemed an evil presage about the kingdom of Egypt, and when the sacred scribe who had foretold that his birth would lay that kingdom low, saw it, he rushed across to kill him,
and with a dreadful cry he said, "This, my king, is the child of whom God showed that if we kill him we shall be free from danger, and he proves the prediction true by trampling on your government and crown. Kill him and save the Egyptians from fear about him and take away the Hebrews' hope of being encouraged by him."
But Thermuthis was too quick for him and snatched the child away, and the king was reluctant to kill him, inclined by God, whose providence watched over Moses.
So he was reared with great care, and the Hebrews depended on him and hoped great things from him, while the Egyptians were suspicious of his rearing.
Yet because, if Moses were killed, there was nobody, either related or adopted, with any prediction on his side for claiming the crown of Egypt and likely to be of more use to them, they refrained from killing him.
Moses, therefore, when he was born and reared in the manner we have described and came to maturity, proved his virtue to the Egyptians, and how he was born to bring them down and raise the Hebrews, as follows.
The Ethiopians, neighbours to the Egyptians, encroached on their region, and seized and took the property of the Egyptians, who were enraged at this and fought to ward them off, but were beaten in battle, where some were killed while the rest shamefully saved themselves by running away.
So the Ethiopians went in pursuit and thinking it cowardly not to subdue all Egypt, went further still and when they had tasted the sweet fruits of the region, never refrained from them. As the nearest areas did not dare to fight them at first, they proceeded to Memphis and the sea itself, with none of the cities able to oppose them.
Crushed by this woe the Egyptians turned to their oracles, and when God counselled them to use Moses the Hebrew as their ally, the king ordered his daughter to bring him out, to be the general of his army.
So after making him swear to do him no harm, she handed him over to the king, expecting his help to greatly benefit them. She also reprimanded the priests, who previously warned the Egyptians to kill him, but now were not ashamed to use his help.
Persuaded by Thermuthis and the king, Moses willingly undertook the task.
The sacred scribes of both nations were glad, the Egyptians at the prospect of soon overcoming their enemies through his daring and that in the same action Moses would be killed, but the Hebrews expecting to escape from the Egyptians, with Moses as their leader.
He attacked the enemy by surprise and led his army on them by surprise, not coming by the river but overland, in a wonderful proof of his prudence.
The land was difficult to cross because of the number of snakes, which it produces in vast numbers. Indeed, some of those creatures are unique to it, not found in other countries, and are worse than others in their harmful effect and appearance, and can fly up unseen and harm men unawares. But Moses found a wonderful ploy to keep the army safe and unharmed.
He made baskets like little boxes out of reeds and brought them along, filled with ibes; this animal is the greatest enemy to snakes, who flee when they come near them, and as they flee they are caught and devoured by them like deer. The ibes are tame creatures and only fierce toward snakes.
About them I write no more at present, since a bird of the ibis kind is not unknown to the Greeks.
When he reached the breeding area, he released the ibes and through them repelled the snakes and used them before the army arrived. In this way he came upon the Ethiopians expectedly.
He attacked them, defeated them in battle and foiled their plans against the Egyptians and went on to overthrow their cities, killing many of the Ethiopians.
When, through Moses, the Egyptian army had tasted success, they did not let up, putting the Ethiopians in danger of being reduced to slavery and utter destruction.
At last they took refuge in Saba, a royal city of Ethiopia, which Cambyses later named Mero, after his own sister. They were besieged there. But the place was very hard to take since it was surrounded by the Nile and other rivers, the Astapus and the Astaboras, whose currents were it very difficult to cross.
The city was situated within a sort of island, and was surrounded against their enemies with a strong wall as well as the rivers, and had great earthworks between the wall and the rivers, so that even when the waters rose most violently, it cannot be flooded. So it is almost impossible to capture the city, even for those who could get over the rivers. When Moses was dissatisfied with the army's lying idle, for the enemies dared not come out to battle, something happened.
This is a title
Tharbis the daughter of the king of the Ethiopians happened to see Moses leading the army near the ramparts and fighting with great courage. Admiring his shrewd proceedings and recognising him to as the cause of the Egyptians' success, when they had despaired of regaining their liberty, and the cause of the extreme danger the Ethiopians were in, who had boasted of their achievements, she fell deeply in love with him and caught by that passion, sent to him the most faithful of her servants to discuss a marriage with him.
He accepted on condition she would have the city handed over, and gave her his oath that when he had once taken possession of the city, he would keep faith and take her as his wife. No sooner said than done; after destroying the Ethiopians, Moses thanked God and held the marriage and led the Egyptians back to their own land.
Though they had been saved by Moses, the Egyptians hated him and were all the more hotly plotting against him, suspecting that he would avail of his success to raise a revolt in Egypt, and they told the king he ought to be killed.
He was thinking the same thing, envious of Moses' campaign and fearing that he might bring him down, so at the urging of the sacred scribes he was planning to kill Moses. He, however, getting wind of the plots against him, went off in secret, and as the highways were guarded, made his escape through the desert, where his enemies would not expect him to travel, and went on bravely, though short of food. When he reached the city of Madian on the Red Sea, named after one of Abraham's sons by Keturah, he sat beside a well not far from the city at the noontime of the day to rest after his long, hard journey, where the local custom gave him a chance to prove his worth and improve his situation.
As those places were very dry the shepherds used to seize the wells in advance, in case their flocks ran short of water if others took it all before them.
Now seven sisters came to this well, the virgin daughters of the priest Raguel, a man greatly honoured by the local people.
These tended to their father's flocks, a work normally done by women in the region of the cave-dwellers. They arrived first to draw from the well enough water for their flocks, into troughs which were there for that purpose.
The shepherds set upon the maidens and drove them off, to have all the water themselves. Moses, thinking it would be wrong for him to let the girls be unjustly treated and let the men's violence over-ride the maidens' rights, drove off those who wanted too much and duly helped the others.
On being so kindly treated they went to tell their father about the shepherds's insolence and the stranger's help, imploring him not to ignor this generous action or let it pass without reward.
He was pleased that his daughters were so keen to reward their benefactor, and told them to bring Moses to him, to be thanked as he deserved.
When he came, he reported what his daughters had said of how he had helped them, and commended his valour, and said that those whom Moses had helped were not ungrateful, but were able to return his kindness and even to exceed his own level of generosity.
So he took him as his son and gave him one of his daughters in marriage, and since, for in times past all the wealth of the barbarians was in livestock, he appointed him guardian and master of his flocks.
Moses, when he had gained the favour of Jethro, for that was one of Raguel's names, stayed there and pastured his flock, and some time later, camping at the mountain called Sinai, he drove his flocks there. This is the highest of all those mountains and the best for pasturage, and it had not been grazed before, because of the belief that God lived there, and the shepherds did not dare approach it. Here he met with a wonderful prodigy.
A fire fed on a thorn bush, yet its green foliage and flowers continued and the fire did not at all consume its fruiting branches, though the flame was hot and fierce.
He was fearful at this strange sight, and even more astounded when a voice spoke from the fire calling him by name and saying how daring he had been to come to a place where no one had ever gone before, since it was divine. He should to move away from the flame and be satisfied with what he had seen, and though he was a good man and descended of great men he shoudl pry no further.
It foretold to him that he would have glory and honour among men, by the presence of the Deity along with him. It also told him to go away from there with confidence to Egypt, to be the commander and leader of the Hebrew masses and to deliver his relatives from the wrongs they endured there.
"For," it said, "they shall live in this happy land where your forefather Abraham lived and shall enjoy all good things." It went on to order that, having brought the Hebrews from the land of Egypt, he should bring them to that place and there offer sacrifices of thanksgiving. Such were the divine commands out of the fire.
Moses was astounded by what he saw and much more by what he heard, and he said, "O Lord, I would think it mad for one who reveres you as I do to distrust your power, since I adore it and know that it has been revealed to my ancestors.
Still I wonder how a private, powerless citizen like me could persuade my own countrymen to leave the region where they now live and follow me to a land where I would lead them. Even if they were persuaded, how can I make Pharaothes let them leave, since they increase their local prosperity by the labours they force on them?" But God urged him to dare all and promised to be with him and help him to persuade by miracles and he could not win by his words. To prove the truth of this, He told him to throw his rod upon the ground When he did so, it crawled like a snake and rolled in its folds and raised its head, ready to strike at an attacker; and then it became a rod again. Then he had him put his right hand into his bosom and when he obeyed he took it out it was white in colour, like chalk, but then resumed its usual colour. He was told to take the water near him and pour it on the ground, and saw it become the colour of blood.
As he was amazed by these signs, God encouraged and assured him he would be his great ally, telling him to use those signs to prove to everyone, that "sent by me, you do all according to my commands. I order you, wait no longer but hurry to Egypt, travelling night and day. Make no delay and do not prolong the Hebrews' slavery and sufferings." Finding it impossible to doubt divine nesssage after the proofs he had seen and heard, Moses begged for that same power when he was back in Egypt, and asked to know His name, so that after hearing and seeing Him, he could also announce his name, and invoke Him by name when he offered sacrifice in the sanctuaries.
So God told him his holy name, which had never been revealed to humans before, and about which I am not free to say any more.
These signs accompanied Moses, not only then, but always when he prayed for them.
He gave firmest assent of all of them to the fire in the bush, and trusting in God as his gracious supporter, he hoped he could save his own nation and bring woes to the Egyptians.
When he learned that Pharaothes had died, who had been king of Egypt when he fled, he asked Raguel's permission to go to Egypt for the sake of his relatives, and taking Raguel's daughter Sapphorah, whom he had married and Gersom and Eleazer, the children he had by her, he hurried to Egypt.
Of these names, Gersom in Hebrew means "he was in a strange land," and Eleazer, that with the help of the God of his fathers, he had escaped from the Egyptians.
When they were near the borders, by God's command his brother Aaron met him, to whom he told all that had happened to him at the mountain, and God's commands.
As they proceeded, the leaders of the Hebrews, heard that they were coming and met them.
Moses declared to them the signs he had seen, and to convince them, performed them before their eyes.
Astounded by these unexpected sights they took courage and hoped all would be well, believing now that God was providing for their survival.
Finding the Hebrews amenable to him, willing to obey his directions and much attached to liberty, Moses went to the king who had recently taken over the leadership, to remind him of all he had done on behalf of the Egyptians when the Ethiopians despised them and were ravaging their region, and how he had commanded their forces and faced toil and danger for them, as if they were his own people, without any proper reward.
He also told in detail of his experiences at Mount Sinai, and the voice of God and the signs shown to make him believe in those commands, and urged him not to disbelieve this or oppose the will of God.
When the king mocked him, Moses let him see with his own eyes the signs that were done at Mount Sinai, but the king was angry and called him a reprobate who had earlier fled from slavery among the Egyptians and was now back with misleading tricks and wonders and magic to astound him.
Saying this, he ordered the priests to let him see the same spectacles, knowing the skill of the Egyptians in this kind of learning and that he was not the only one to know them and claim them as divine. He affirmed that even though he set such wonderful sights before him, he would only be believed by the unlearned; and when they threw down their rods, these too became snakes.
Undaunted, Moses said, "O king, I do not scorn the wisdom of the Egyptians, but I claim that what I do is above what these do by magic and art, as much as the divine is above the human. For I will show that what I do is not done by craft, or by simulating the truth, but by the providence and power of God." When he had said this, he threw his rod upon the ground, ordering it to become a snake. It obeyed and went around eating up the rods of the Egyptians, which loked like dragons, until it had devoured them all
then it resumed its proper form and Moses took it up again.
The king was no more moved by this than before, but said furiously that he could not impose on the Egyptians by his cunning and craft. Then he ordered the man who was chief taskmaster over the Hebrews to give them no rest from their labours, but make their hardships worse than before.
Where formerly he had provided them with chaff for making bricks, he would no longer do so, but made them collect the chaff by night after working hard all day.
When this doubled their labour, they put the blame on Moses, on whose account their toil and misery had become worse.
Not giving in to the king's threats or letting his zeal wilt in face of the Hebrews' complaints, he set his soul resolutely against both and devoted every effort to gaining freedom for his countrymen.
Going to the king, he persuaded him to let the Hebrews go to Mount Sinai where they would sacrifice to God, as He had commanded, and not to oppose His will but to value His favour above all things. He must let them go, for fear of thwarting Him unawares, and so bring on himself the penalty for opposing God's commands.
For all things work against those who provoke the divine wrath. Neither the earth nor the sky befriend them, nor do the fruits of the womb come in their natural way, but all is askew and hostile. He said the Egyptians would learn this by sad experience, and that, even without their consent, the Hebrews would leave their land.
When the king despised the words of Moses and took no heed of them, dire plagues came on the Egyptians, which I will describe in detail, both because no such plagues as the Egyptians now experienced ever befell others, and to show that Moses never failed in anything he foretold to them, and because it is good for people to learn this caution, never to do anything to displease God for fear He be provoked to anger and punish them for their wrong-doing.
This is a title
For at God's command their river ran with blood, so that it could not be drunk and they had no other source, and not only was the water the colour of blood, but it brought great and bitter pains on those who drank it.
It was like that to the Egyptians, but to the Hebrews it was sweet and fit to drink and no way different to normal. As in these paradoxical circumstances the king did not know what to do and was afraid on behalf of the Egyptians, he allowed the Hebrews to leave, but when the plague ceased, he changed his mind again, end would not let them go.
When God saw his ingratitude and his failure to grow wise after this disaster, he sent another plague upon the Egyptians. Countless frogs consumed the fruit of the ground; the river was full of them, so that those who drew water found it spoiled by the blood of these animals as they were died and the water was filthy with their slime.
The land was polluted by their breeding and their dying, and they spoiled the vessels used in the homes and were found in what they ate and drank and came swarming into their beds. A dreadful smell and stink arose from them, of frogs alive or dead or putrefying.
As the Egyptians were burdened by these pests, the king ordered Moses to take the Hebrews and be gone, at which the whole mass of frogs disappeared, and both land and river returned to their natural state.
But as soon as Pharaothes saw the land freed of the plague, he forgot why it had come and kept the Hebrews back, and as if wishing to experience more sufferings, still would not release Moses and his people, having given permission from fear rather than from any good motive.
God then punished his deceit with another plague, for the bodies of the Egyptians now swarmed with lice, by which those wretches died miserably, unable to destroy this sort of vermin either with salves or ointments.
This horror shook the king of Egypt, who feared the ruin of his people by so shameful a form of death, and made him half draw back from his folly to a sounder mind.
He allowed the Hebrews to depart, but when the plague then eased, he required them to leave their children and wives behind, to guarantee their return, which provoked God still further, for thinking to turn aside his providence, as if not He but Moses were punishing the Egyptians for the sake of the Hebrews.
He filled the land with all sorts of vile creatures, whose properties had never before been seen and from which the people died so that the land lacked farmers to cultivate it; and even if people survived, they were worn out by illness. When Pharaothes even then did not yield to God's will, but while letting the husbands take along their wives, made the children stay behind, the Deity did not fail to punish his wickedness by sending many sorts of afflictions still worse than before, for their bodies broke out in terrible boils and their innards wasted away and so most of the Egyptians died.
When the king did not come to his senses even by this plague, hail was sent down from heaven, such as the skies of Egypt had never suffered before, unlike that which falls in winter in other climates, but larger than what falls in the middle of spring on people living it the northern, arctic regions, which flattened their crops.
After this a tribe of locusts consumed any seed which was not harmed by the hail, destroying all the Egyptians' hopes of a harvest from the earth.
One would think the aforesaid troubles would be enough to bring one who was merely foolish, not malicious, to see reason and see where his interests lay. But Pharaothes was led not so much by his folly as by his malice. Even when he saw the cause, he still stood against God and willfully betrayed the path of virtue, so he bade Moses lead away the Hebrews with their wives and children, leaving their livestock behind, since their own had been destroyed.
Moses said he did not reckon this as just, for they needed the livestock to offer sacrifices to God; so during the delay caused by this, a thick darkness without a glimmer of light, spread over the Egyptians, blocking their sight and choking their breath by the density of the air, so that they died miserably, terrified of being swallowed up by the fog.
This dissipated after three days and nights, and when Pharaothes still did not repent and let the Hebrews go, Moses came to him and said, "How long will you disobey the command of God? For he orders you to let the Hebrews go. Unless you do so, there no other way to be free your afflictions."
But the king angry at what he said, threatened to behead him if he came again to trouble him about this.
Moses said he would no longer speak to him about them, for he himself, along with the leading Egyptians, would beg the Hebrews to leave
and saying this, he went away.
God indicated that with one plague he would force the Egyptians to let Hebrews go and ordered Moses to tell the people to prepare a sacrifice and get ready on the tenth of the month Xanthicus, for the fourteenth, to bring out the Hebrews with all their possessions. This month is called Pharmuth by the Egyptians, Nisan by the Hebrews, and Xanthicus by the Macedonians.
He got the Hebrews ready for their exodus and having sorted them into tribes, kept them together in one place. When the fourteenth day arrived and all were ready for departure they offered the sacrifice and purified their houses with the blood, using bunches of hyssop, and burned the rest of the flesh after supper, ready to leave. That is why we sacrifice in the same way even now, and call the feast Pascha, meaning the feast of the passover, for on that day God passed over us and smote the Egyptians with disease, for the first-born of the Egyptians were destroyed that night, so that many living near the palace advised Pharaothes to let the Hebrews go.
He then called for Moses and told them to be gone; thinking that once they were gone from the region Egypt's afflictions would cease. They also honoured the Hebrews with gifts; some to hasten their departure and others because they had known them as neighbours.
So they left, with the Egyptians weeping and repenting for having treated them so badly. They journeyed by Letopolis, at that time deserted but where a Babylon was later built, when Cambyses laid Egypt. Leaving quickly, on the third day they reached Beelzephon, a place on the Red Sea.
Finding no food from the land as it was a desert, they ate loaves kneaded of flour, just barely baked. They subsisted on this bread for thirty days, which was as long as they could survive on what they had brought from Egypt, while rationing it and using only for their minimum needs, and not eating their fill.
Thus, in memory of the need we then experienced, we keep for eight days, a feast called Unleavened Bread.
The whole number of those who went out, including women and children, could not easily be counted, but those who were of military age were six hundred thousand.
They left Egypt on the fifteenth day of the lunar month of Xanthicus, four hundred and thirty years after our forefather Abraham came to Canaan, and two hundred and fifteen years after Jacob moved into Egypt. Moses was in his eightieth year and Aaron was three years older.
They brought out with them the bones of Joseph, as he had told his sons to do.
But the Egyptians soon regretted letting the Hebrews leave and the king was mortified that it had been won by the magic arts of Moses, so they resolved to to out after them. So they took their weapons and equipment and pursued them, to bring them back if they overtook them, since they would now have no pretext to pray to God against them, once they had been allowed to leave.
They expected to overcome them easily, unarmed and weary after their journey, so they hurried in pursuit, enquiring of everyone which way they had gone; and indeed that land was difficult to cross, not only by armies but even by oneself.
Moses led the Hebrews in this direction so that if the Egyptians changed their minds and wished to go in pursuit, they would suffer for their malice and for breaking their sworn promises; but also on account of the Philistines, who had quarreled with them and hated them of old, not to alert them to their departure, for their region is near that of Egypt.
So Moses led them not along the road leading to the land of the Philistines, but wanted them to go through the desert, so as to enter the land of Canaan after a long journey and much suffering.
Also, God had commanded him to bring the people to Mount Sinai, to sacrifice to him there.
When the Egyptians overtook the Hebrews they prepared for battle and by their numbers drove them into a narrow place.
For their pursuers had six hundred chariots, with fifty thousand cavalry and two hundred thousand infantry, all armed.
They also seized the roads by which they thought the Hebrews might escape, shutting them between steep cliffs and the sea,
for their path was blocked by a mountain ending at the sea, and ruggedly impassable. Thus they pressed upon the Hebrews, with their army camped between the mountains and the sea and blocking any way out for them into the plain. Unable to continue under the siege, because they lacked provisions, and seeing no possible way of escape, and even if they thought of fighting, they had no weapons, they expected to be totally wiped out unless they gave themselves up to the Egyptians.
They put the blame on Moses and forgot all the signs God had wrought to win their freedom, so that in their unbelief they wanted to throw stones at the prophet, who had roused their courage and promised them rescue; and they resolved to surrender to the Egyptians.
Among the women and children there was sorrow and lamentation, for nothing but destruction lay before them, surrounded by mountains, the sea and the enemy and seeing no way out from them.
But while the crowd looked at him wildly, Moses did not abandon his care for them or his trust in God, who had fulfilled all his other predictions about regaining their freedom and would not now let them be enslaved or killed by the enemy.
Standing up in the middle of them, he said, "It is not right for us to distrust even men who up to now have managed our affairs well, as if they would not continue the same, but it is no less than madness to despair now of the providence of God,
who beyond your expectations has performed everything he promised through me in your escape from slavery.
Indeed as you see, when we are in dire distress we ought rather to trust in the help of God, under whose guidance we find ourselves now this tight place.
He can save us from our impossible plight, in ways that neither you nor the enemy can imagine, and thereby show his power and providence over us.
God helps those whom he favours not just in small things, but in cases where one can see no human hope of a solution.
Trust in a a Protector who can make small things great and can show up this mighty force as merely weakness. Even if you see no hope of escape because of the sea in front and the mountains behind, do not fear the Egyptian army or despair of salvation, for if God wishes, even these mountains may be flattened for you and the sea become dry land."
After saying this, Moses led them towards the sea while the Egyptians looked on.
Though they were within sight, these were so worn out by their pursuit that they thought it best to postpone the battle til the next day.
When Moses arrived at the sea-shore, he took the rod and called on God to be their ally and help, saying,
"You know well, O Lord, that to escape our present plight is beyond human power or planning so if this army is to be saved, after leaving Egypt under your direction, it will be only by your doing.
We despair of any other help or plan and take refuge only in you, if there is any way we can escape by your providence from the wrath of the Egyptians.
Let it come quickly and show us your power and raise up courage and hope of deliverance in this people who have fallen into despair.
We are in a hopeless place, but it is a place owned by you, for the sea is yours, the mountains that surround us are yours and can open up for us if you command them and the sea also can become dry land. We could even escape through the air, if by your power you save us in that way."
With these words of worship, he struck the sea with his rod, and it parted at the stroke and it turned back on itself, leaving the ground dry, as a way of escape for the Hebrews.
When Moses saw this divine manifestation and how the sea gave place to dry land, he went into it first of all and bade the Hebrews follow on that divine road, rejoicing at the danger to the enemy following them and thanking God for providing them such an amazing means of salvation.
They made no delay, but went on quickly, led by God's presence with them, and the Egyptians at first thought they were mad and were going to certain destruction. When they saw how they went forward a long way without harm with no obstacle to block their journey, they hurried to pursue them, hoping that the sea would also stay calm for them, and with their horses in front they went down into the sea.
While these were spending time putting on their armour, the Hebrews escaped them and, unharmed, reached land on the other side. The enemy pursued them more bravely, expecting no harm to come to them either. But the Egyptians did not know that they were going on a road made for the Hebrews and for no others, one made for those in danger, not for those sought to use it for others' destruction.
As soon as the whole Egyptian army was within it, the sea flowed back to its place and came down around the Egyptians with a torrent of storm and wind. Showers of rain fell from the sky with dreadful thunder and lightning, and thunderbolts darted upon them. There was nothing that God sends upon men as signs of his anger, which did not happen at this time, for a dark and dismal night oppressed them, so that they all died in this way, so that there was not one left to report this disaster to the survivors. The Hebrews could hardly contain themselves for joy at their wonderful salvation and the destruction of the enemy, and felt themselves now securely saved, since those who wished to force them into slavery were destroyed and when they found God so clearly as their protector.
When they had so escaped their danger and seeing their enemies punished in an inhuman way, they spent all night singing hymns and rejoicing. Moses also composed a song to God, in hexameter verse, chanting his praises and in thanksgiving for his kindness. I have passed on every detail of this as I found it in the sacred books. Let nobody by amazed by the strangeness of the story, how a way was opened for those in former times, who were free from wickedness, whether it happened by the will of God or whether it happened of its own accord,
whereas not long ago, for the sake of those with Alexander the king of Macedon, the Pamphylian Sea let them pass through, when they had no other way to go, when it was the will of God to destroy the rule of the Persians. This is accepted as true by all who have written of Alexander's deeds. But regarding these events, let each one decide as he pleases. On the next day Moses gathered the weapons of the Egyptians, which were brought to the Hebrews camp by the current of the sea and the winds blowing in that direction, and he guessed that this too came from divine Providence, not to leave them without weapons. When he had gathered and armed the Hebrews, he led them to Mount Sinai, to sacrifice to God and give thanks for the salvation of the people, as he had been instructed to do.
The Hebrews found this life in the wilderness so disagreeable and hard that they took the risk of attacking the Canaanites, contrary to God's command. They refused Moses' advice to keep the peace and thought they could defeat the enemy without him, even suspecting and accusing him of scheming to keep them dependent, that they would always be in need of his help. So they resolved to make war on the Canaanites, saying that God had helped them before, not because of Moses's intercession but because of his general care for their entire nation, due to their ancestors, whom he had taken under his special protection. It was due to this and their own merit that he had granted them liberty in the past and if they now made an effort he would still be present as their ally.
They claimed to be strong enough to defeat their enemies, even if Moses wished to cut them off from God.
They wanted to be their own masters and not so highly esteem their being saved from the burden of the Egyptians as to let Moses be a tyrant over them and force them to live according to his pleasure,
"as though God reveals our destiny to him alone, and we were not all of Abraham's stock, but only to him did God give knowledge of the future, so that we must learn it from him."
They ought to ignore his arrogant pretences and put their trust in God, and take possession of the land He had promised them, not heeding the man who in God's name forbade them to do so.
So, considering their plight and this desert which made it seem even worse, they rushed to battle with the Canaanites, with God as their leader and expecting no help from their Legislator.
Judging this their best plan, they marched against the enemy, but these, undaunted by the attack or by their large numbers, opposed them bravely. Many of the Hebrews were killed, and the rest of the army, with their line in disorder, were pursued and shamefully fled to their camp.
This unexpected misfortune put them in total dismay and made their future look bleak, as they gathered from it that this misfortune came from the wrath of God, for rushing out to war before he gave his approval.
This is a title
When Moses saw his people stricken by this defeat, fearing that the enemy would attack them, emboldened by their victory and seeking further glory, he saw that he should lead the army farther from the Canaanites and into the desert.
The people turned to him again, aware that their affairs could not prosper without his care for them; so he led the army further into the wilderness, intending to rest them there and not come to grips with the Canaanites until God gave them a more favourable opportunity. As it often happens with large groups and especially after failure, that they are hard to please and to persuade, so it was with the Jews. For being six hundred thousand, and because of their large numbers not readily subject to their betters even in good times, now in their plight and calamities they were even worse, both to each other and to their leader.
This is a title
Such disunity took hold of them as was never among the Greeks or the Barbarians, and they were in danger of being destroyed by it, until they were saved by Moses, who set aside their abuse and the fact that they had almost put him to death.
This is a title
God did not want them to be ruined, and despite their disregard for their Legislator and the commandments he had given them by Moses, he saved them from the troubles of this sedition which, without his providential care, would have overwhelmed them.
First I will explain the cause of the sedition and then how Moses dealt with it.
Korah, a Hebrew of notable family and wealth, was an eloquent man, gifted in persuading the people by his speeches. Seeing the great dignity enjoyed by Moses, he envied him bitterly, being of the same tribe and kin, and thinking himself more worthy of that honour, due to his wealth and not being his inferior by birth.
So he raised discontent against him among his tribesmen the Levites, and especially among his relatives, saying that it was a shame to let Moses seek glory for himself and abuse it, under a pretense of God's orders, and unlawfully give the priesthood to his brother Aaron, not by the will of the people, but by his own will, like a tyrant bestowing dignities just as he pleased, and that his secrecy was more insulting than open violence, for not only had he taken the power without their consent, but they were even unaware of his plans.
Whoever knows himself worthy of some dignity should seek it by persuasion and not by sheer force, but those who are unable to obtain such honours justly, make a show of goodness and grow powerful by using cunning instead of force.
The people should punish such men, even if they think their plans secret, and not let them gain strength until they became their enemies in public.
"For what justification can Moses give, for bestowing the priesthood on Aaron and his sons?
If God chose to bestow that honour on one of the tribe of Levi, I am more worthy of it than Moses, being his equal in family and above him in wealth and in age. If He bestowed it on the eldest, Rubel's tribe should properly have it, in Datham and Abiram and Peleth, the oldest men of that tribe and powerful too, in their great wealth."
In saying this, Korah wished to seem concerned for the people's welfare, but in reality he wanted to have the people transfer the dignity to himself, acting with malice as he spoke to his own tribesfolk.
When his words gradually spread to more people and the hearers added further to the scandal about Aaron, the whole army was full of it.
Along with Korah were two hundred and fifty notables, who wanted the priesthood taken from Moses's brother and to dishonour the man himself. The populace was so roused that they tried to stone Moses, and were indecently assembled, in noisy disorder before the Tent of God, and shouted to remove the tyrant and rid the people from their slavery under one who claims the name of God to impose his own commands. If God were to chose someone as priest, he would have given it to someone worthy of the honour, not one inferior to many others, and even if God had seen fit to bestow it on Aaron, he would have allowed the people to confer it and not have left this to his own brother.
Though Moses had long foreseen this calumny of Korah and knew the people's fury, he was not frightened but came to the assembly full of courage, since he had advised them well about their affairs and knew that his brother had been given the priesthood by God's choice and not by his own favour to him.
He said not a word to the people, but spoke as loudly as he could to Korah, and being very skilful in speech, with an ability to address people, he said, "Korah, you and each of these (pointing to the two hundred and fifty men) seem worthy of this honour; nor do I rule out that the whole company may deserve it, even if not be so rich or powerful as you.
But Aaron did not get the priesthood because he excelled in wealth, for you surpass us both in the greatness of your riches; nor because of his breeding, for God has given us all the same forefather; nor was it from brotherly love, as another might justly have done, giving it to his brother.
If I were not subject to God and his laws in bestowing this honour, would I have bypassed myself and given it to another, being nearer of kin to myself than to my brother, and closer to myself than to him?
For surely it would be unwise for me to risk the danger of giving offence by bestowing the blessing upon another in this way.
But I am above such base motives, and God would not let himself be so despised; nor would he leave you unaware of what to do, in order to please him, but he has chosen for himself the one to minister to him and has freed us from that care.
As it is not to be received by my favour, but only by God's judgment, I propose it be competed for by those who wish, provided that he who was already nominated and was given it, may be allowed now to be a candidate. He prefers to hold this honour without seeing you in uproar, though it was with your approval that he got it, for while the donor was God, we did no wrong in agreeing to to accept it with your goodwill.
It would be impious not to have accepted the dignity when he offered it; indeed it would be wrong to refuse it, when God saw thought fit to give it to someone for all time to come and confirmed it to him. But let him again judge who he wishes to offer sacrifices to him on our behalf, and preside over our religion.
It is absurd that Korah, coveting this honour, to rob God of the power of giving it to whom he pleases.
So cease your revolt and upheaval about this matter, and tomorrow morning let each of you who desires the priesthood bring a censer from home and come here with incense and fire.
Now, Korah, leave the judgment to God and await his judgment on this matter, and do not make yourself greater than God, but you too should come to judgement about this honour.
I suppose we may allow Aaron to offer himself to this judgment, since he is of the same lineage with yourself and has done nothing in his priesthood that is subject to blame. Come together then, and publicly offer your incense before all the people, and when you offer it, he whose sacrifice God accepts shall be ordained to the priesthood and shall be clear of this calumny, as though I had given him the honour because he is my brother."When Moses had spoken, the crowd gave up their turbulence and their suspicions of him and agreed to what he had said, as it made sense to the people. So they dissolved the meeting but gathered again the next day to be present at the sacrifice and at the judgment to be made about the priesthood.
This was a turbulent assembly as the crowd was in suspense to see what would happen, for some would have liked to see Moses accused of wrongdoing, while the wiser sort wanted and end to trouble and strife, afraid that if this revolt continued, the beauty of their system would disappear.
The majority naturally delight in belittling those charge and was in uproar, swayed by what each one said. Moses sent servants to Abiram and Datham bidding them come to the assembly and remain for the liturgy. But they told the messengers they would not obey and could not condone Moses's behaviour, who was slyly growing too dominant over the people. Hearing their answer, Moses asked his chief advisers to follow him and went to Datham's followers, not afraid to go to the insolent, and they did not refuse but followed him.
When Datham's associates learned that Moses and the notables of the people were coming to them, they stood before their tents with their wives and children, to see what Moses would do.
They also had their servants around them for defence in case Moses should use any force.
But he approached and lifting up his hands to heaven cried aloud so as to be heard by the whole people, saying, "O Lord of all that is in heaven, on earth and in the sea, you are the truest witness to what I have done and know that it was all done by your will and that it was you who helped us in all our efforts and showed mercy on the Hebrews in all their distress; come now and hear my words.
This is a title
No act or thought escapes your knowledge, and you will not refuse to support what I say, rather than the ingratitude of these men. You know better than I what happened before I was born, not having learned it by report, but seeing it and being present when it was done. But bear me witness about the things done recently which these, though they know them well enough, wrongly claim to suspect.
When I lived a private life, I left the good state I enjoyed with my father-in-law Raguel, by my diligence and by your guidance, and gave myself over to this people and suffered many things on their account. I took great pains first for their liberty and now for their safety, always ready to help them in every distress. Now since I am held suspect by those whose being here is due to me, I expect you to come, you who showed me that fire on mount Sinai and let me hear your voice and see wonders in that place, who told me to go to Egypt and declare your will to this people
You who shook the happiness of the Egyptians and let us flee from slavery to them and subdued to me the rule of Pharaothes; You who made the sea dry land for us when we did not know where to go and poured on the Egyptians the destructive waves which were divided for us; You who gave us the safety of weapons when we were unarmed;
You who made foul springs to flow, fit for drinking and gave us water from the rock, in our time of need; You who saved our lives with food from the sea, when the fruits of the earth failed us; You who sent us food from heaven which was never seen before; You who promped us to know your laws and directed our form of government.
Come to me, O Lord of the whole world, as judge and incorruptible witness and show that I never accepted any unjust bribe from any of the Hebrews, or condemned the innocent on behalf of one that was rich, or harmed this community. I am now suspect of a thing furthest from my mind, of giving the priesthood to Aaron, not at your command, but at my personal preference.
Please show now that all things are ruled by your providence and nothing happens by chance, but is under your will and so attains its purpose. Show how you care for the one who cares for the Hebrews, by punishing Abiram and Datham, who scorn You as insensible, as though You were defeated by my scheming. Do this by so publicly punishing these men who fly in the face of your glory, that they leave this life in no ordinary manner, dying like other men. Let the ground they walk upon open beneath them and swallow them up, with their families and property. This will show your power to all and will be a lesson in wisdom for those who do not glorify you reverently.
By this I shall be shown as a good servant, in the precepts you have given me.
But if their calumnies against me are true, keep them safe from all harm and destroy me as I have prayed against them. When You have punished those who seek to do wrong, grant this people harmony and peace. Save this people who follow your commands and keep them free from harm and let them not share in the punishment of the sinners, for You know it is not right for all the Israelites to suffer the punishment for those men's wrong."
When he had said this, weeping, suddenly the ground moved, agitated as when the wind raises waves in the sea. The whole people was terrified, and the ground around their tents sank with a terrible sound and swallowed up all that was dear to them.
They disappeared so that there was no sign of anyone, when the earth that had opened under them closed again and became as it was before, so that whoever saw it later could not see a sign of it.
That is how these men died and gave proof of God's power. One would grieve for them, not only for their disaster but that their own relatives were pleased that they suffered in this way. On seeing this event they forgot their relationship to them and approved of the judgment. Considering that Datham's people had died for being troublemakers, they did not grieve for them.
Moses then summoned the rivals for the priesthood to assign the priestly office, that the one whose sacrifice found most favour with God be chosen. Two hundred and fifty men attended, honoured by the people not only on account of their ancestors, but on their own account, as excelling the others. Aaron and Korah came forward and all offered incense before the Tent in the censers they brought with them. Such a bright fire shone out as none had ever seen either by human artifice or in earthquakes caused by subterranean fire, or in spontaneous forest fires when the trees rub on each other, for this bright flame came at God's command. As it came on them, all two hundred and fifty, including Korah, were so entirely destroyed that nothing remained of their bodies.
Aaron alone was spared unharmed by the fire, which God sent only on those who should be burned.
After these were destroyed, Moses wanted the memory of this judgment to be passed down so that future ages might learn from it, so he ordered Aaron's son Eleazar to put their censers near the bronze altar,
as a memorial of what these men suffered for thinking that God's power could be set aside.
So Aaron was no longer reckoned to hold the priesthood by the favour of Moses, but by God's public decree, and so he and his children after him enjoyed that honour in peace.
This did not end the revolt, which rather grew stronger and flourished.
The reason for its worsening was such as made it seem the disaster would never cease but would last a long time.
The people believed that nothing happens without the providence of God, but thoughtt this would not have happened apart from God's favour to Moses, so they blamed him that the anger of God had flared not so much for any wrong done by those who were punished, as because Moses had caused it.
They had been destroyed not because they sinned, but for being zealous about the divine worship, and the one who had caused so many of the best of them to be lost and escaped any punishment himself, had now confirmed the priesthood to his brother.
Who could any longer dispute it with him? Who else could now compete for it, seeing that those who first did so had died horribly? The relatives of the victims pleaded with the people to curb the arrogance of Moses, for their own security.
On hearing that trouble was brewing, for a good while Moses was afraid that they would attempt another revolt, with major bad consequences, so he called the people to a meeting and patiently heard what they had to say without opposing them, for fear that he would embitter the people. He only asked the heads of the tribes to bring their staves, with the names of their tribes inscribed upon them. It was agreed that the one on whose staff God should give a sign should receive the priesthood. So the rest brought their staves, as did Aaron, who had written the tribe of Levi on his staff. These staves Moses laid up in the Tent of God. The following day he brought out the staves, which were recognised by those who brought them and the people too, as they were clearly marked. All the rest were in exactly in the same form as when Moses received them, but they saw buds and branches grown from Aaron's staff, with ripe almonds upon them, as the staff was cut from that tree.
The onlookers were so amazed at this strange sight, that though Moses and Aaron had previously been somewhat hated, the hatred was now laid aside and people began to wonder at God's judgment in their favour, and then applauded what God had decreed and let Aaron hold the priesthood in peace. Three separate times God had ordained him priest so he was confirmed in that honour. Thus this major revolt of the Hebrews, which had lasted a long time, was finally resolved.
Since the tribe of Levi was exempt from war and military service and was set apart for divine worship, for fear they should lack and be concerned for the necessities of life and so neglect the temple, Moses ordered by the will of God, that when the Hebrews occupied the land of Canaan, they should assign forty eight good and proper cities to the Levites, and let them own the area up to two thousand feet outward from the walls.
Besides, he directed that the people should pay a tenth of their annual fruits of the earth, to the Levites and the priests. This is what that tribe receives from the people, but I think I should set down what is paid by all, especially to the priests.
He directed the Levites to give to the priests thirteen of their forty-eight cities and to set apart for them a tenth of the tithes which every year they receive from the people
He said it was just to offer to God the first-fruits of all that grew from the ground, and that they should offer the first-born male of the four-footed beasts that are dedicated to be sacrificed, to be killed by the priests, that they and their households may eat them in the holy city,
Owners of animals that may not be eaten according to our ancestral laws, should offer a shekel and a half instead of them, but five shekels for a first-born human being. They are also to receive first-fruits from the shearing of the sheep, and when any corn is baked into bread, some of the loaves should be given to them.
If people have made a sacred vow, those who are called Nazarites who let their hair to grow long and use no wine, when these consecrate their hair, and offer it for a sacrifice, they are to assign their shorn locks to the priests.
Also people who have dedicated themselves to God in corban, or what the Greeks call a gift, give pay money for the priests if they wish to be freed from that service, thirty shekels for a woman and fifty for a man, but if any are too poor to pay the appointed sum, the priests may decide it as they think fit. People who slaughter at home for their own use and not for ritual worship are to bring to the priests the victim's maw and cheek and right shoulder. Moses devised that amount of maintenance for the priests, besides what they got from any sin-offerings the people gave them, as I have explained in the preceding book.
He also ordered that of everything assigned to the priests, their servants, daughters and wives should have a share as well as themselves, except what comes to them from sin-offerings, for of these only the males of the priests' family may eat, and only in the temple and on the same day they were offered.
After the revolt, when Moses had made these rules he moved with the whole army and came to the borders of Idumaea. He then sent envoys to the king of the Idumaeans, asking to be let pass through his region and agreeing to send him any hostages he might require, as a security from harm. He also asked him to allow his army to buy provisions, and, if he insisted upon it, he would even pay a price for the water they would drink.
But he was not satisfied to grant what Moses' envoys requested and would not allow a passage for the army, but brought his people to face Moses in arms and to stop them if they tried to force their way through.
When Moses consulted God on this, He would not let him start a war, so he took his forces by a roundabout route through the wilderness.
Then his sister Miriam passed away on the fortieth year since after leaving Egypt, at the new moon on the first day of the month Xanthicus.
They gave her a splendid public funeral and buried her on a mountain called Sin, and after the people had mourned for her thirty days, Moses purified them as follows.
He brought an unblemished heifer, unused for ploughing or farming and entirely red, to place of great purity, where the high priest killed her and with his finger sprinkled her blood seven times before the Tent of God.
Then the heifer was burned entire, with her hide and innards, and they threw into the fire cedar-wood and hyssop and scarlet wool.
Then a man who was purified gathered all her ashes and laid them in a place of great purity.
Any persons who were defiled by a dead body would put a little of these ashes into spring water, with hyssop, and sprinkled them with it, on the third and on the seventh day, and after that they were clean.
He told them to do this also when they came into their own land.
When their leader had done this purification after the mourning for his sister, he led the army off through the wilderness and Arabia as far as a place which the Arabs count as their metropolis, which was formerly called Arce, but is now named Petra.
Since Moses had told him that he was about to die, Aaron there ascended a nearby mountain and in the sight of the whole army, for the place was steep, he put off his high-priestly vestments and handed them on to his son Eleazar, to whom the high priesthood came on account of his age, and died in full view of the people.
He met his end on the same year that he lost his sister, having lived a total of a hundred and twenty three years. He died at new moon on the first day of the month the Athenians call Hecatombaeon, the Macedonians call Loos and the Hebrews call Abba.
The people mourned him for thirty days and when it ended Moses moved the army from there and came to the river Arnon, which, rushing down from the mountains of Arabia and flowing through a total wilderness, flows into lake Asphaltitis and forms the border between the Moabites and the Amorites.
This is a fertile area, capable of maintaining a large population with its good produce. Moses sent messengers to Sihon, the king of this region, asking him to let his army pass through, on whatever security he might want, that no harm would be done either to the territory or the people ruled by Sihon, and that he would buy his provisions at a price that would profit them, even if they chose to sell them their water too. But Sihon refused and armed his troops and was fully prepared to block the Hebrews from crossing the Arnon.
When Moses saw the Amorite ready to go to war with them, he thought it wrong to ignore the affront, so thinking to wean the Hebrews from their indolent ways and check the disorders arising from this, which had led to their former rebellion, and they were unruly even still, he asked God if he should go to war.
When God promised him victory, he was very full of spirit and ready for the contest and urged the soldiers, asking them to fight with gusto, now that the divinity had sanctioned them to do so.
On receiving this permission, which they so much desired, they donned all their armour and instantly set about the task.
But when the Hebrews were ready to attack him, the Amorite king changed his mind. Not only did he fear the Hebrews, but his whole army, which before had seemed so bold, was now afraid. So they could not resist the first assault or stand up to the Hebrews, but fled, thinking that it gave them better hope of survival than fighting.
They put their trust in their strong cities, but when forced to escape to them it did them no good, for the Hebrews instantly saw them yielding and pursued them hard, and when their ranks were broken they fell into a panic.
They broke off and fled to the cities, but the others hotly pursued them and grimly persevered in their efforts and being skilful in slinging and hurling missiles of all kinds, and being quick in the pursuit as they wore only light armour, they overtook the enemy, and could reach by their slings and their bows even those farther away who could not be caught.
There was a slaughter, and those who escaped were wounded and suffered even more from thirst than from any of their opponents, for it was summer.
Most of them who had stayed together were forced down to the river to drink, and as the others had fled in droves the Hebrews outflanked and shot at them, so that, between spears and arrows, they killed them all.
Sihon their king also died.
And the Hebrews stripped the corpses and took the spoil, taking lots of produce from the land which was rich in fruits.
The army went all through it without fear and fed their livestock upon it, capturing the cities too, which could not resist them since all the fighting men were killed. This disaster befell the Amorites, who were neither wise in counsel nor brave in deed, and the Hebrews occupied their land.
It is a region situated between three rivers and naturally resembling an island, the river Arnon being its southern, and the Jabbok its northern side, which as it flows into the Jordan loses its own name to adopt the other. The Jordan itself then forms its western border.
In these circumstances, Og, the king of Gilead and Gaulanitis, attacked the Israelites, hurring with an army to help his friend Sihon. But when he found him already killed, he still decided to come and fight the Hebrews, expecting to be victorious over them and wanting to test their bravery. His hope failed and he was killed in the battle and all his army was destroyed. So Moses crossed the river Jabbok and overran the kingdom of Og, destroying their cities and killing all their inhabitants, whose wealth exceeded all in that part of the continent, in the richness of the soil and the volume of their goods.
Now Og had few equals for his bodily size or his handsome looks. He was also a man very skilled with his hands, so that his actions were on a par with his size and handsome appearance. They got an inkling of his strength and size when they captured his bed at Rabbath, the royal city of the Ammanites; it was made of iron, four feet wide and more than twice as long, plus an extra foot!
His fall not only improved the lot of the Hebrews for the present, but by his death he brought them further success, for they took the sixty fortified cities subject to him and all of them, both individually and as a group, took plenty of booty.
When he had brought his army to the Jordan Moses encamped in the great plain opposite Jericho, a fortunate city that produces palm-trees and balsam.
The Israelites began to feel very proud of themselves and were eager for the fight.
After a few days spent offering thank-offerings to God and letting the people enjoy themselves, Moses sent a party of warriors to lay waste the region of the Madianites and to capture their cities.
The reason for going to war with them was as follows. Balak, the king of the Moabites, who inherited from his ancestors a treaty of friendship and alliance with the Madianites, saw how great the Israelites had grown, and he was much frightened due to the danger to himself and his kingdom, for he was unaware that the Hebrews preferred not to meddle with any other region, but would be content to possess the land of Canaan, as God forbade them to go any farther. So, with more haste than wisdom, he resolved to oppose them with words, for he did not judge it wise to fight them after their successes, since they took heart even in face of setbacks. He planned to stop them, if possible, from growing greater and sent envoys to the Madianites about them.
These Madianites knew a man called Balaam, living near the Euphrates, who was the finest prophet of the time and was friendly towards them. They sent some of their honoured princes with Balak's envoys, to ask the prophet to come and call down curses to destroy the Israelites. When the envoys came, Balaam received them kindly and after supper enquired about the will of God and what the Madianites wanted of him. When God opposed his going, he told the envoys that he himself was willing to do what they asked, but that God opposed it, the same God who had given him such a reputation by the truth of his predictions.
He said that the army they wanted him to come and curse was favoured by God, and therefore advised them to return home and not to continue as enemies of the Israelites. With that he sent the envoys away.
At Balak's most fervent request, the Madianites sent other envoys to Balaam, and wanting to gratify them, he again enquired of God. But God was displeased at this attempt and told him not to reject the envoys. Balaam did not realise that God said this in order to deceive him, so he went with the envoys.
A divine angel met him on the journey, as he was in a narrow passage hedged in on both sides, and the donkey Balaam was riding knew it was a divine spirit meeting him and turned aside, pushing Balaam against one of the ramparts, and disregarded the blows he gave her when he was hurt by the wall. When the donkey fell down, still distressed by the angel and by the beating, by the will of God she spoke with a human voice and complained that Balaam was treating her unjustly, for while she had served him without fault, he struck her with blows, failing to see that the providence of God blocked her from serving him in what he was now about.
As he was troubled by the human-sounding voice of the donkey, the angel appeared to him and blamed him for striking his donkey, for the creature was not at fault, since he himself had come to bar his journey, as contrary to the will of God.
Balaam was afraid and was preparing to return home, but God urged him to continue his intended journey, with orders to say only what he himself would suggest to his mind.
With these orders from God, he came to Balak, and after the king entertained him magnificently, he asked him to go to one of the mountains and view the state of the Hebrews' encampment. Balak himself, along with a royal attendance, brought the prophet to the mountain, which lay above them, sixty furlongs from the camp.
When he saw them, he asked the king to build him seven altars and to bring him as many bulls and rams; which the king soon did. He then killed the sacrifices and offered them as holocausts, in order to observe what they might mean.
Then he said, "Happy is this people, to whom God grants innumerable good things and for whom his providence is helper and guide. There is no nation among mankind but you will surpass them in virtue and in following the best rules of life. You will be counted as people pure from wickedness and will leave those rules to children better than yourselves, because God favours you above all mankind and will make you the happiest of all people under the sun.
You shall keep the land to which he sent you and its people shall always serve your children, and all the earth and sea shall be filled with your glory. The number of your descendants will be enough for the world in general and each of its regions.
